What is Mormonism? - CARM
Source: https://carm.org/what-is-mormonism
Author: Matt Slick
Date: September 15, 2014

NOTE: CARM uses Cloudflare bot protection. Partial content fetched before verification wall.

"Mormonism is the short-hand name given to the religious organization officially called
'The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints,' commonly known by the abbreviation
LDS, for Latter-day Saints. It claims to be the restored church and teaches that shortly
after the apostles died, there was a great apostasy. Mormonism is the restoration of the
'true church' is the most correct of any on earth.

Mormonism was started by Joseph Smith who was born in Sharon, Vermont on December 23,
1805. As a young boy, he said he was bothered by the different denominations of
Christianity and went into the woods to pray. It was there that he received a visit from
God the Father and Jesus who told him that all churches were false. When he was 17 he
said that an angel named Moroni, the son of Mormon, appeared to him on Sept. 21, 1823,
where he was told about golden plates that described the Nephites, the people who lived
in the Americas hundreds of years earlier. But he was not to receive these plates until
later. Finally, in 1827 he obtained them and was also given the supernatural ability to
translate the golden plates and into what is called the Book of Mormon which was
published in 1830, thus reestablishing the true church.

The Book of Mormon is allegedly the account of descendants of Israelites who came from
the Middle-East to the Americas before the time of Christ. It covers the period of about
600 B.C. to A.D. 400 and tells the stories of the Jaredites, the people from the Tower
of Babel who came to Central America but perished because of their own immorality. It
also describes some different Jews who fled Israel and came to America. They were led by
a man called Nephi. They divided into two groups, the Nephites and Lamanites who warred
against each other. The Nephites were victorious in 428 A.D."

To view the full article, visit the URL directly in a browser.
