Why I Choose to Believe 
the Bible Is True - Voddie Baucham
Curriculum:
A Life and Business Changing Experience
KNOWING WHY YOU BELIEVE
ROUND
TABLE
2
Please watch the video by Voddie Baucham 
and come prepared to discuss it at your next 
round table meeting. 
Why do you believe what the Bible says is 
true? 
Most Christians rely on one of two answers: 
1. That is the way I was raised. 
2. I tried it and it worked for me.
The problem with both of these answers is they rely on personal experience. Other people 
have different experiences or were taught different things. Who’s to say which is right?
“I choose to believe the Bible because it is a reliable collection of historical documents, 
written by eyewitnesses during the lifetime of other eyewitnesses, reporting supernatural 
events that took place in fulfillment of specific prophecies and claimed their writings are 
Divine and not of human origin.” - Voddie Baucham
Reliable Collection of Historical Documents
Over 23,000 archaeological digs have corroborated the Biblical record, without one 
disproving find. Many historical references in Scripture were not found anywhere else, 
only later to be proven true through archaeological discovery. The Bible includes many 
specific names of places and people, all verifiable. 
Written by Eyewitnesses During the Lifetime of Other Eyewitnesses
If there are many witnesses telling the same story, it can likely be believed. There were 
many eyewitnesses to Biblical events who would have disputed the testimony of Scripture 
if it was not true. The Bible has also remained unchanged over thousands of years. 
Why I Choose to Believe the Bible Is True
By: Voddie Baucham
ROUND
TABLE
3
Reporting of Supernatural Events
Many of the events recorded in the Bible, including healings, miracles, and the resurrected 
Christ are supernatural events that cannot be explained through man-centered solutions. 
Fulfillment of Specific Prophecies
Many specific prophecies recorded in Scripture have 
verifiably taken place, in some cases hundreds of years 
after they were recorded. The probability of these 
prophecies coming true is humanly impossible, leading 
us to the only remaining conclusion: The Bible is the 
Word of God. 
Claiming the Writings Are Divine
The authors of the Bible claim it is God speaking directly to and through them. Just 
because men penned the words does not make them unreliable.
Although the Bible is scientifically and historically accurate, neither science nor history can 
prove the Bible is what it says it is. However, using the evidentiary method, the Bible has 
been used in court and is full of reliable witnesses whose stories corroborate each other. 
It is 66 books in 3 languages written by 40 authors, spanning 3 continents and over 1,500 
years, and has been corroborated by 23,000 archaeological digs. Therefore, it is rational 
and logical to believe the Bible is true.
ROUND
TABLE
It is rational and 
logical to believe 
the Bible is true.
4
What did you learn from this presentation?
How well would you say your parents or church taught you regarding the truth of 
the Bible?
Who in your life has presented arguments against the Bible? Are you now better 
equipped to discuss this with them?
ASSIGNMENT
ROUND
TABLE
Email: contact@truthatwork.org
Phone: (317) 842-1694
Fax: (317) 595-0933
truthatwork.org
ROUND
TABLE
