We have a reliable collection of
historical documents written down by
eyewitnesses during the lifetime of
other eyewitnesses. So far, we just got
a good history book. Now, it gets good.
They report to us supernatural events.
Look at what he says here. Verse 17. For
when he received honor and glory from
God the Father, such an utterance as
this was made to him by the majestic
glory. This is my beloved son with whom
I am well pleased. And we ourselves
heard this utterance made from heaven
when we were with him on the holy
mountain. Now we got the mount of
transfiguration. Now we got supernatural
events, not superhuman
events. We have supernatural
events, stuff you can't get good enough
to do. We're not talking about
psychosmatic healings. We're talking
about a woman with an issue of blood who
is healed instantly. We heard earlier
about the man with a withered hand
healed instantly. Men who were blind
from birth, deaf from birth, mute from
birth. Men who were lame from birth,
healed instantly. One of my favorites,
Jesus tells the disciples, "Y'all go
over to the other side of the lake. I'll
meet
you." Later on on the boat, somebody, I
don't know who, they say, "Hey,
um, did Jesus say how he was coming?"
No. Why? Cuz he he
coming. Or my favorite of them all,
Friday dead, Sunday risen.
We have a reliable collection of
historical documents written down by
eyewitnesses during the lifetime of
other eyewitnesses. They report to us
supernatural events and those events
took place in fulfillment of specific
prophecies. We're not talking that
General Nostradamus type stuff. Specific
prophecies. For example, when Jesus is
on the cross, interestingly, when he's
on the cross, I don't know, let's just
imagine, go back, shall we? If we will.
Let's go back first century and we're
Jewish people and we probably talk about
our Old Testament. Maybe we use Aramaic
when we speak to one another. And I want
you to open your Bible, for example, to
Psalm number 22, which is where we're
going here for a moment. If I wanted you
to do that, I couldn't tell you to open
to Psalm number 22 because we've only
had chapters and verses for a few
hundred years. If it was the first
century and I was speaking to you in
Aramaic and I wanted you to turn to
Psalm number 22, I would have to tell
you to turn to the title of Psalm number
22, which would have been the first line
of Psalm number 22. So, I'd have to tell
you to open your scroll to
elabakani or my God, my God, why have
you forsaken me? Now, that ought to
sound familiar cuz it's exactly what
Jesus said while he was being crucified.
I know you know this, but I like it so
much. Let's do it anyway. Psalm number
22:1. My God, my God, why have you
forsaken me? Look at verse six. I'm a
worm and not a man of reproach of men
and despised by the people. All who see
me sneer at me. They separate with the
lip. They wagged the head saying,
"Commmit yourself to the Lord. Let him
deliver him. Let him rescue him because
he delights in him." Sound familiar?
That's what's being said to Jesus while
he's being crucified. Look at verse 12.
Many bulls have surrounded me. Strong
bulls of Bashan have encircled me. They
open wide their mouth at me as a
ravening and roaring lion. I'm poured
out like water. All my bones are out of
joint. My heart is like wax. It is
melted within me.
Interesting. Pierce him in the side.
Puncture the paricardium. Blood and
water rush out. Look at verse 15. My
strength is dried up like pot and my
tongue cleavings to my jaws. How about
this wine vinegar on this sponge, Jesus?
Because you did say I thirst. Verse 16.
Dogs have surrounded me, folks. That's
Gentiles. A band of evildoers has
encompassed me. One on the right and one
on the left. They pierce my hands and my
feet. I can count all of my bones.
Why? Because nobody had to break your
legs to hasten your death. They divide
my garments among them and for my
clothing they cast lots. Folks, that was
written a thousand years before Jesus
was born. It was written by a man who
never once saw crucifixion in his life
because crucifixion had not yet been
invented. That is why Peter can say back
in our passage verse 19, so we have the
prophetic word made more
sure. We have a reliable collection of
historical documents written down by
eyewitnesses during the lifetime of
other eyewitnesses. They report to us
supernatural events that took place in
fulfillment of specific
prophecies. We just looked at a couple
of examples of that. And then here's the
kicker. They claim their writings are
divine rather than human in origin. Look
down with me at verse 20. But know this
first of all, that no prophecy of
scripture is a matter of one's own
interpretation. For no prophecy was ever
made by an act of human will, but men
moved by the Holy Spirit spoke from
God. They claimed these are God's words
and not theirs. That's why these
prophecies were fulfilled hundreds or
thousands of years afterwards. That's
why they use phrases like, "And thus
says the Lord." And the Lord spoke to
Moses saying, "And God said to Abraham."
They say, "These are God's words and not
men's words." Oh, I hear
you. But see, that's the problem. Nobody
wants to believe that because they know
that men wrote the Bible. And when we
say it's the word of God, they say, "No,
it's the word of men." Because men took
pen to paper. And you cannot trust
things that were written by men. That's
always interesting to me. You know why?
Cuz back in school, I don't remember
anybody, you know, in my math class.
Well, you got something wrong. You know,
you're supposed to use Pythagorean
theorem there. You know that a square
plus b²= c² thing. You know, you didn't
use pagorean theorem there. You got this
wrong. You can't mark me off for that.
That came out of a math book. A man
wrote that math book. That's means it's
fallible. Just because man took pen to
paper doesn't mean you can't trust
what's written. The question you ask is
this. Is what's written reliable? Is it
internally consistent? Is it
corroborated? Well, what's
corroboration? I don't know. Maybe three
languages, Greek, Hebrew, Aramaic, three
continents, Asia, Africa, Europe, over
40 authors, most of whom never met one
another, who wrote over a period of some
1500 years, and tell one singularly
woven together story. How's that for
corroboration?