There are other ways that people try to
deal with these eyewitness accounts. Let
me just deal with a few of them. There
are books written on these things. I'm
not making these up. Um there were PhD
dissertations written on these ideas. Um
because you have to explain this
resurrection to you. You can't deny the
evidence. It's just there just in the
scriptures. Again, you have to remember
that the Bible is not one book. There's
66 books that make up the Bible. So, we
actually have a collection of evidence
in the New Testament that validates the
resurrection. It's not just there's not
just one guy. There are a lot of guys
writing about the resurrection. And now
we're talking about eyewitnesses to the
resurrection. By the way, if you do the
math, um there are over 300 eyewitnesses
to the resurrection still alive when
first Corinthians is written. If you do
the math of all of the people to whom
Jesus appeared and Jesus was after his
resurrection between his resurrection
and his ascension was over a month. So
for over a month people saw Jesus
resurrected for over a month. There were
thousands of eyewitnesses to the
resurrection. So this this list could be
expanded. But even if it's not expanded,
there are over 300 individuals who are
still alive, which means that Paul's
claims were falsifiable. In other words,
there were individuals who could step
forward and demonstrate that what he was
saying was false. That's important.
That's important. It's kind of like, you
know, when you see all these crime
dramas and there's a crime that's
committed and the police come after
someone and what do they ask him? Do you
have an alibi? What's the worst thing
you could say? Yeah, I was I was all by
myself watching television. Because
that's not falsifiable, which means it's
not verifiable, which means it's not a
very good alibi. But if you say, "Yeah,
actually, you know, I was hanging out
with some friends, watching watching,
you know, watching a little footie,
whatever y'all call it over here, and
there are
about 25 of us. Now, what can happen? I
can go talk to those individuals and
they can say, "Nope, never saw him." I
can prove you wrong or I can verify the
truth. Paul could have been proved wrong
and he wasn't. There is nothing anywhere
in existence that falsifies the claims
of 1 Corinthians 15. Nothing anywhere in
existence. Anywhere. So the fact that
people can't falsify the claims means
that they have to explain what the
witnesses saw, that's powerful in and of
itself. And so scholarship that denied
the resurrection couldn't deny the that
these claims were made. What they had to
deny was that what was claimed was
actually a resurrection. And what are
some ways that they did that? One was
called the swoon theory. I wish I was
making this up. What's the swoon theory?
That Jesus didn't actually die. He just
he swooned. He passed out. And then
actually what happened was they saw him
and he wasn't really resurrected. He
just never died. So according to the
swoon theory, Jesus in the garden of
Gethsemane on the night before was
praying and he sweat drops of blood.
It's happened
rarely to the human body, but it has
happened. One of the things that he
would have been suffering from at that
point was low blood pressure because of
this experience. Then he was beaten,
flogged until the skin was ripped from
his flesh with a
catinetails, which is basically, you
know, strips of leather with pieces of
bone and metal and glass and the like,
beaten until the skin was ripped from
his flesh. After this, he had been
marched around for miles, by the way, in
his condition of low blood pressure
because he goes from the Mount of
Olives, Garden of Gethsemane, over to
Caiaphas, you know, and then he goes
over to Annis and he comes back to Kai,
goes over from there, you know, up the
the western wall to the fortress of
Antonia to Pilate, you know, all of the
then he's sent and he's f that's when
the flogging and everything else happens
and he actually goes to the cross. He's
nailed to the cross through his wrist
and through his feet and he hangs there
having been beaten within an inch of his
life and and his chest cavity is
basically caving in on itself. You see,
you don't bleed to death on the cross.
You suffocate under the weight of your
own upper body. You suffocate. He
couldn't even carry his own cross. But
now he has to hold himself up and
there's no way. And then just to make
sure he is pierced through the side by
professional executioners who did this
regularly. And we know that they made
their mark because they pierced the
paricardium surrounding the heart and
blood and water rushed out. Having
verified his death, he was placed into a
tomb and a stone was rolled in front of
the tomb. And according to the swoon
theory, he just woke
up, stood
up, hopped over to the door, moved the
stone that took several men, frightened
the guards, and then convinced his
disciples that this is what resurrection
looks like, and you want this when you
die. And was able to live like that for
nearly two months.
small problem. We would still have a
body and no one could survive that.
There's another theory. Uh this theory
is actually the hallucination theory.
And the hallucination theory basically
says that these authors really did
believe that they saw Jesus. They
believe that they saw the resurrected
Christ. And so the women, they run to
the tomb and they hallucinate. And then
Peter and John run to the tomb. One
makes it before the other and
hallucinates. and then the other joins
him in the hallucination that they now
share with the women. They go and they
tell the other disciples about their
hallucination and the other disciples
hallucinate but Thomas is not with them
during the hallucination. So 8 days
later they hallucinate again and Thomas
joins in on the hallucination and then
over 500 witnesses at once share in the
hallucination. But while they're
hallucinating, it never dawns on the
Romans to open the tomb and show them
the body and prove that they're
hallucinating.
Because if this was a hallucination,
there would still be a body in the tomb.
Then there is the conspiracy theory. The
conspiracy theory says that they stole
the body. So according to the conspiracy
theory, what happens is these men come
with Jesus to Jerusalem and as he is
taken from the mount of olives, they all
run away. That is except the three
Peter, James and John. And then
eventually James and John, they can't
hang in there anymore because they're
terrified along with the rest of the
disciples. Peter hangs in as long as he
can. And then all of a sudden there is
that whole rooster crowing thing. And
he's afraid of a little girl. So he lies
to her about knowing Jesus. And then he
lies to some soldiers about knowing
Jesus. And ultimately they've all run
away. But the hallucin but the
conspiracy theory says that one day
having witnessed the crucifixion of
Jesus Christ, the brutal death of Jesus
Christ and been so afraid that they all
ran away, one of them decided, you know
what, we should make up a story and we
should say that he was resurrected and
all the rest of them said, "Yeah, that
sounds like a really good idea." So
somehow they go and steal the body
without the guards recognizing it. And
in one by one they're killed off, run
through with a spear, beaten to death
with a tree branch, boiled in hot oil,
crucified upside down, beheaded. This is
the way that the apostles died. And not
one of them gave up the
conspiracy. These are the theories that
have had to be put forth. Why? Because
the evidence is overwhelming. And if the
evidence is overwhelming, you have to
have another explanation. And the other
explanation is, yes, these men really
thought they saw something or these men
lied about what they saw, but most of
them leave the little pesky problem of a
body that's still in the tomb. When the
fact of the matter is Christ rose from
the dead, and he was seen by
thousands and hundreds of those
eyewitnesses were still alive when this
letter that we're reading right here was
written. He is risen. It's the only
thing that could explain how
cowards became as bold as lions, even to
the point of death. It's the only thing
to explain the consistency and coherent
nature of the gospel as it is
proclaimed. Men who hallucinate don't
write like this. It's the only thing
that explains the last 2,000 years. By
the way, it's the only thing that
explains why hardened seventh day
sabotarian Jews. They they are hardcore
seventh day sabotarian Jews and they
begin to meet on the first day of the
week. What explains that? The
resurrection of Jesus Christ. Nothing
else. Nothing else.
See, if you've come into this place
tonight and you've looked at
Christianity perhaps just as some
outward performance, just as something
that's important during this week and
perhaps during Christmas, something
that's important for social reasons,
something that's important for family
reasons, that then please, may I say to
you, you must reconsider because there
is something much more significant going
on here. God is real. Your need for him
is real because your sin is real. And
you know this. God's provision is real.
Because Christ is real. His
life is real. His death is real. His
resurrection is real. His return is
real. And there's nothing more real in
your entire life. If you are here and
you have not come to grips with this, if
you are here and you are trusting on
your own
goodness, if you're here and you're
somehow walking around under the
delusion that Christ would be crushed
and killed by his father on behalf of
sinners who could have made it another
way, then God help you. Turn from your
sin. Turn from your self-reliance. Turn
from your empty religion and flee to
Christ. Flee to the foot of the cross.
Flee to the only place where there is
hope for
you. Flee to the only one who has ever
asked answered rather that question that
every human being is forced to ask. What
happens to me when I
die? And how can I be sure? And how can
I have
hope? Christ is our
hope. Flee to him.