T h i r d  E d i t i o n


--- PAGE BREAK ---

“Paul David Washer’s study guide on the doctrine of God, The One True God, is the 
best introductory work known to me. It sets out great truths in clear and balanced form. 
Human authorities are not quoted but it is evident that the author is familiar with the 
literature of historic Christianity and accordingly he misses the pitfalls into which others 
might fall. Young Christians could scarcely spend their time better than working carefully 
through these pages.”
– Iain H. Murray
Co-Founder and Editorial Director 
for the Banner of Truth Trust
“The One True God will lead you through a profitable exercise in biblical and system­
atic theology. You will learn what the Bible says about the character and attributes of the 
God who is truly like no other. This is a wonderful work that I pray will help many grow 
in knowing God. Read it and be blessed. Read it and worship your God.”
– Daniel L. Akin
President of Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary
“When my young son put on his first pair of glasses, he was shocked to find a world 
of beautiful things to see out there. He could not keep his mouth shut about it. This 
guided look at God’s disclosure of Himself will be like that for many nearsighted Chris­
tians. The study of the autobiography of God will not only manage our myopia, but will 
unbolt our mouths! Like a skillful optometrist, I will use and recommend The One True 
God often.”
– Jim Elliff
Christian Communicators Worldwide
www.ccwtoday.org
“In The One True God, Paul Washer has provided a sound, biblical, substantive theo­
logical study for those of us who have been longing for more. Anyone interested in bolster­
ing their understanding of the Doctrine of God will find this study immensely valuable. 
Moreover, since The One True God is expositional in nature, it can also serve as a teaching 
tool to give young believers a solid foundation, or to aid in evangelizing unbelievers.”
– Voddie Bauchum Jr.
Pastor, author of Family Driven Faith


--- PAGE BREAK ---

P a u l  D a v i d  W a s h e r
H a n n i b a l ,  M i s s o u r i
www.grantedministries.org
T h i r d  e d i t i o n


--- PAGE BREAK ---

The One True God
The One True God
Copyright © 2004 by Paul David Washer of HeartCry Missionary Society.
Published by Granted Ministries Press, A Division of  Granted Ministries.
Publication History:
1st Edition printed in 2004.
2nd Edition printed in 2007.
3rd Edition, revised and expanded, published in 2009 by Granted Ministries Press.
Cover design and graphics by Jonathan Green and Scott Schaller.
For information or additional copies of The One True God and other
resources write:
Granted Ministries Press
P.O. Box 1348
Hannibal, MO 63401-1348 USA
www.grantedministries.org
orders at grantedministries dot org
All Scripture quotations taken from the New American Standard Bible®,
Copyright © 1960, 1962, 1963, 1968, 1971, 1972, 1973, 1975, 1977, 1995
by The Lockman Foundation. Used by permission.
ISBN 978-0-9817321-0-7
All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted in any form by any means—electronic, mechanical, photocopy, re­
cording, or otherwise—except for brief quotations in printed reviews, without the 
prior permission of the publisher. Subject to USA copyright law.
Printed in the United States of  America
2009


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Table of Contents
God is One
1
1
1
God is Spirit
1
2
9
God is Great and Perfect
3
3
1
God is Eternal, Self-Existent, and Immutable
4
4
1
God is Omnipotent, Omnipresent, and Omniscient
5
5
3
God is Holy
6
6
7
God is Righteous
7
7
9
God is True and Truthful
8
8
9
God is Faithful
10
9
3
God is Love
11
10
3
God is Creator and Sustainer
12
11
7
God is Lord Over All
14
12
1
God is Lawgiver and Judge
15
13
5
The Names of God
17
14
3


--- PAGE BREAK ---

vi 
Acknowledgments
How can any man or angel write a workbook about God? It would be an 
easier task to count every star in heaven. Knowing this, we acknowledge 
that whatever is found to be “holy, righteous, and good” in these pages is 
the result of the grace of God. Knowing something of the seriousness of the 
subject matter, this workbook has been written with fear and trembling:
“Not many of  you should become teachers, my brothers, for you know 
that we who teach will be judged with greater strictness.” James 3:1
I would like to thank my wife Charo who is growing to be “strong in the 
Lord,” and my three children Ian, Evan, and Rowan who are able to pull 
me away from my work with a glance. I would also like to thank the staff 
at HeartCry who encouraged me to publish this work, and Pastor Charles 
Leiter of Kirksville, Missouri, whose insights were invaluable.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

  vii
Introduction
Method of Study
The great goal of this study is for the student to have an encounter with 
God through His Word. Founded upon the conviction that the Scriptures 
are the inspired and infallible Word of God, this study has been designed in 
such a way that it is literally impossible for the student to advance without 
an open Bible before him or her. Our goal is to obey the exhortation of the 
apostle Paul in II Timothy 2:15: 
“Do your best to present yourself  to God as one approved, a worker 
who has no need to be ashamed, rightly handling the word of  truth.” 
Each lesson deals with a specific doctrine of the attributes of God. The 
student will complete each lesson by answering the questions according to 
the Scriptures given. The student is encouraged to meditate upon each text 
and write his or her thoughts. The benefit reaped from this study will de­
pend upon the student’s investment. If the student answers the questions by 
thoughtlessly copying the text and without seeking to understand its mean­
ing, very little will be gained. 
The student will find that this is primarily a Biblical study and does not 
contain much in the way of colorful illustrations, quaint stories, or even 
theological commentaries. It was our desire to provide a work that only 
pointed the way to the Scriptures and allowed the Scriptures to speak for 
themselves. 
This book may be used by an individual, small group, or Sunday school 
class. It is highly recommended that the student complete each chapter on 
his or her own before meeting for discussion and questions with the group 
or discipleship leader. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

viii 
Exhortation to the Student
Through the use of this book the student is encouraged to study biblical 
doctrine and discover its exalted place in the Christian life. The true Chris­
tian cannot bear or even survive a divorce between the emotions and the 
intellect, or between devotion to God and the doctrine of God. According 
to the Scriptures, neither our emotions nor our experiences provide an ad­
equate foundation for the Christian life. Only the truths of Scripture, under­
stood with the mind and communicated through doctrine, can provide that 
sure foundation upon which we should establish our beliefs and behavior as 
well as determine the validity of our emotions and experiences. The mind 
is not the enemy of  the heart, and doctrine is not an obstacle to devotion. The two 
are indispensable and should be inseparable. The Scriptures command us 
to love the Lord our God with all our heart, with all our soul, and with all 
our mind (Matthew 22:37), and to worship God in both spirit and in truth 
(John 4:24).
The study of  doctrine is both an intellectual and devotional discipline. It is a 
passionate search for God that should always lead the student to greater 
personal transformation, obedience, and heartfelt worship. Therefore, the 
student should be on guard against the great error of seeking only imper­
sonal knowledge, and not the person of God. Neither mindless devotion nor 
mere intellectual pursuits are profitable, for in either case, God is lost. 
The New American Standard Version
While there are many good English translations of the Bible, this study 
was developed for use with the New American Standard Version. This ver­
sion is not absolutely required to complete the study, but there may be times 
when the student will notice a minor difference if they use a different trans­
lation (especially if they are using a less accurate, non-literal translation). 
This translation of Scripture was chosen for the following reasons: (1) the 
unwavering conviction of the translators that the Bible is the infallible Word 
of God; and (2) its faithfulness to the original languages.


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---

“Hear O Israel! the Lord is our God, the Lord is one!”
– Deuteronomy 6:4 –
“The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God, and 
the fellowship of the Holy Spirit, be with you all.”
– II Corinthians 13:14 –


--- PAGE BREAK ---

  11
Lesson One
God is One
God is One
I
t is the testimony of the Scriptures that there is only one true God. The belief in 
one God is often referred to as monotheism [Greek: mono, one + theos, god]. The 
belief in more than one God is called polytheism [Greek: poly, many]. The Christian faith 
is monotheistic.
In 
1. 
Deuteronomy 6:4 is found one of the most important declarations in all the Scrip­
tures. What does this declaration affirm?
Note: There is only one true God. It is important to understand that the word one comes from 
the Hebrew word echad, which often refers to a unity of more than one person. For example, 
in Genesis 2:24 we read, “…they (i.e. the man and the woman) shall become one flesh,” and in 
Ezra 3:1, “…the people gathered together as one man.” This truth will have great importance in 
the second part of our study where we will learn that the one true God exists as a Trinity: the 
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
What do the following Scriptures affirm about the being of God? Are there any other 
2. 
gods apart from the God of the Scriptures?
Deuteronomy 4:39


--- PAGE BREAK ---

12  The One True God
Isaiah 43:10
Isaiah 45:18
According to the following Scriptures, how should all men live in light of the truth 
3. 
that the God of the Bible is the one true God?
Exodus 20:3-6
Mark 12:28-30
God is a Trinity
T
he word trinity comes from the Latin word trinitas, which means threefold or three 
in one. The Bible affirms that the one true God exists as a Trinity: the Father, 
Son, and Holy Spirit. They are three distinct persons who are distinguishable from one 
another, and yet they share the same divine nature or essence and relate to one another 
in unbroken fellowship. It is important to note that the word trinity is not found in the 
Scriptures, but was first employed by Tertullian, one of the early Church Fathers, to de­
scribe what the Bible teaches about the triune nature of God.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is One  13
As Christians, we openly admit that the Trinity is a great mystery that is beyond hu­
1. 
man comprehension, and yet we cannot deny the Trinity because it is the teaching of 
the Scriptures. The same Bible that declares God to be One also refers to three differ­
ent persons as God:
How is the Father referred to in
a. 
 I Corinthians 8:6?
G
i.
OD, the Father (see also: John 6:27; I Peter 1:2).
How is the Son referred to in the following Scriptures?
b. 
The Word (
i.
i.e. the Son of God—v.14) was God (John 1:1).
The only begotten G
ii.
od (John 1:18).
My L
iii.
ord and my God (John 20:28).
He who existed in the F
iv.
orm of God and was equal with God 
(Philippians 2:6).
Our great G
v.
od and Savior (Titus 2:13).
The one who is over all, G
vi.
od blessed forever (Romans 9:5).
The I
vii.
mage of the invisible God (Colossians 1:15).
The one in whom all the fullness of D
viii.
eity dwells in bodily form 
(Colossians 2:9).
Your throne, O G
ix.
od (Hebrews 1:8).
How is the Holy Spirit referred to in the following Scriptures?
c. 
Acts 5:3-4
i.
:
In verse 3, Ananias lied to the Holy Spirit.
In verse 4, Peter said that Ananias lied to God.
I Corinthians 3:16 
ii.
and 6:19:
In I Corinthians 3:16, the believer is called the temple of God.
In I Corinthians 6:19, the believer is called the temple of the Holy 
Spirit.
Romans 8:9
iii.
: The Holy Spirit is referred to as:
The Spirit. He is a real person, distinct from the Father and the Son.
The Spirit of God. God the Father and the Holy Spirit are one.
The Spirit of Christ. God the Son and the Spirit are one.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

14  The One True God
In 
2. 
Matthew 28:19 is found the declaration used in every Christian baptism as com­
manded by the Lord Jesus Christ Himself. This declaration is a wonderful example of 
the unity and trinity of God:
The Lord commanded us to baptize in the N
a. 
ame of  the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. 
Note: Notice that name is singular and yet it is ascribed to three different persons. The verse 
does not say in the names of the Father, Son, and Spirit, but in their one Name, because the 
Three are One.
The Trinitarian view of God that we discovered in Matthew 28:19 is seen throughout 
3. 
Scripture. Read II Corinthians 13:14 and then complete the phrases:
The grace of  the Lord J
a. 
esus Christ.
The love of  G
b. 
od.
And the fellowship of  the H
c. 
oly Spirit be with you all.
Note: Such a literary structure denotes absolute equality. It is noteworthy that the Son is 
mentioned even before the Father. It would be blasphemous to mention the Son and the Spirit 
in the same breath with God the Father if they were not equal with Him (see also: I Corinthi­
ans 12:4-6; Ephesians 4:4-6; I Peter 1:2).
The Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are of one divine essence and dwell in perfect equal­
4. 
ity and unity. At the same time, they are also three distinct persons, and not simply 
one person who reveals Himself in distinct ways at different times. In the following 
Scriptures this truth is clearly affirmed:
Mark 1:9-11
a. 
:
The S
i.
on is baptized (vs. 9,10).
The S
ii.
pirit descends (v.10).
The F
iii.
ather speaks from heaven (v.11).
John 14:16-17
b. 
:
The S
i.
on prays to the Father (v.16).
The F
ii.
ather gives the Helper or Holy Spirit (v.16-17).
The S
iii.
pirit lives with and in the Christian (v.17).


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is One  15
Note: From these simple texts of Scripture it is clear that the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are 
three distinct persons. God is not three independent persons or three different Gods; nor is 
God one person who wears three different masks or simply reveals Himself in three different 
forms. The God of the Scriptures exists simultaneously as three distinct and equal persons who are 
one in their divine nature or essence, and who dwell in perfect equality and unity.
Although the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are equal and exist in perfect unity, they 
5. 
often carry out distinct functions, and manifest themselves in different ways. What do 
the following Scriptures teach us about this truth? Fill the blank spaces with the cor­
rect answer found in each Scripture:
The F
a. 
ather is the invisible God who no man has seen (John 1:18).
The S
b. 
on is God made flesh and the perfect revelation of  the Father (John 1:1,14, 18; 
14:9).
The S
c. 
pirit is God living in the Christian (Romans 8:9; John 14:16-17, 23).
Summary
From the Scriptures we have studied, we may affirm the following truths about 
God:
God is One.
1.	
 There are not three different Gods in the Trinity—a heresy called
Tritheism.
God is Three.
2.	
 There is one God who exists as three persons: the Father, the Son, and 
the Holy Spirit.
The Three Persons of  the Trinity are real and distinct Persons.
3.	
 The Trinity is not just one 
person who wears three different masks, or who reveals himself in three different 
forms—a heresy called Modalism.
The Three Persons of  the Trinity are perfectly equal.
4.	
 The Son is not less than the Father, 
nor is the Spirit less than the Son.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

16  The One True God
The Three Persons of  the Trinity may manifest themselves in different ways and may carry 
5.	
out different functions. No man has seen the Father; the Son became flesh and dwelt 
among men; the Spirit dwells with every believer in Christ.
The Scriptures affirm two important truths: God is one and God is three
6.	
. Although we can­
not fully comprehend how this can be, we must believe and teach both truths with 
equal conviction. Heresy (i.e. false doctrine) occurs when we affirm one truth and 
deny the other, or emphasize one truth over the other. We must hold to all truth 
equally and avoid all extremes.
The Mystery of  the Trinity is not a ground for its denial.
7.	
 Some may say that they cannot 
believe what they cannot understand, or that if something cannot be explained, it 
cannot be true. If we were to apply this same logic to the entire Bible, or even to our 
own existence, then there would be very little left for us to believe. Even the simplest 
truths of Scripture and of human reality go beyond our understanding. We do not 
believe because we can understand, but we believe because it is true—the testimony 
of the Holy Scriptures.
Most illustrations used to explain the Trinity are woefully inadequate.
8.	
 Often students of the 
Bible have resorted to various illustrations in an attempt to explain the Trinity. Re­
gretfully, these illustrations often do more harm than good. For example, the Trinity 
is sometimes compared to water that exists in three different forms—liquid, ice, and 
steam. Such an illustration is a distortion of the Trinity in that it suggests that God 
is one person who takes three different forms—a heresy called Modalism (see #3). 
It is better to simply affirm the oneness and threeness of God without explanation 
or illustration than to give an explanation or illustration that is misleading or even 
heretical.


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---

“But an hour is coming, and now is, when the true 
worshipers will worship the Father in spirit and truth; 
for such people the Father seeks to be His worshipers. 
God is spirit, and those who worship Him must worship 
in spirit and truth.”
– John 4:23-24 –


--- PAGE BREAK ---

  19
Lesson Two
God is Spirit
God is Spirit
G
od is not material or corporeal (i.e. He does not possess a physical body). Two 
of the greatest implications of this truth are: (1) God is not confined to any of 
the physical restraints so common to humanity, and (2) God is not visible and therefore 
should never be degraded with images made by men. At times, the Scriptures speak of 
God as if He possessed a physical body. There are references to His arms, back, breath, 
ears, eyes, face, feet, fingers, etc. How do we explain these references in light of the truth 
that God is spirit? In theology, these references are considered anthropomorphic [Greek: 
anthrópos, man + morphé, form] expressions. In other words, God is simply attributing to 
Himself human characteristics in order to communicate a truth about Himself in a way 
that men can comprehend. For example, the Bible speaks of God’s “wings,” and of His 
people “hiding under the shadow of His wings” (Exodus 19:4; Ruth 2:12; Psalm 17:8; 
36:7; 57:1; 61:4; 63:7; 91:4). It would be absurd to interpret such statements literally.
How do the Scriptures describe God in 
1. 
John 4:24?
God is S
a. 
pirit.
According to the following Scriptures, how shall we live in light of the truth that God 
2. 
is Spirit?
We must worship God sincerely
a. 
 (John 4:24).


--- PAGE BREAK ---

20  The One True God
Note: The reference to worshipping God “in spirit” has two possible implications: (1) We 
must worship God with all our being, sincerely and profoundly. (2) We must worship God in 
the power and under the direction of the Holy Spirit. The reference to worshipping God “in 
truth” also has two possible implications: (1) We must worship God truthfully, sincerely, and 
with integrity. (2) We must worship God according to the truth (i.e. according to the will of 
God revealed in the Scriptures).
We must avoid associating God with a religious building or ascribing to God any human 
b. 
limitation (Acts 17:24-25).
How do the Scriptures describe God in 
3. 
Hebrews 11:27?
God is He who is U
a. 
nseen.
Note: If God is invisible, how do we explain the passages of Scripture where He seems to 
reveal Himself in a visible form? To answer, we must first understand two principles of bibli­
cal interpretation. First, the Bible does not contradict itself. Second, the passages of Scripture 
that are difficult to interpret with certainty should be interpreted in light of those passages 
whose interpretation is unmistakable. The Scriptures clearly state that God is invisible, there­
fore the “visible” appearances of God in the Scriptures (with the exception of the incarnation 
of the Son of God) should be interpreted as “visions”—symbolic representations of spiritual 
reality. Ezekiel tells us (1:1) that “the heavens were opened” and he “saw visions of God.” 
In verse 28, the prophet summarizes these visions as “the appearance of the likeness of the 
glory of the Lord.” In Daniel 7:9-15, Daniel sees a symbolic vision of God the Father as the 
“Ancient of Days.” In Luke 3:22, John the Baptist sees a vision of the heavens “opening” and 
the Holy Spirit descending with the appearance of a dove (the symbolism is obvious). 
What do the following Scriptures affirm about God, and especially about His invis­
4. 
ibility?
I Timothy 1:17


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Spirit  21
I Timothy 6:15-16
According to 
5. 
Deuteronomy 4:11-12 and 15-16, how should we live in light of the 
truth of God’s invisibility?
God is immaterial (
6. 
i.e. spirit) and invisible. How then can we know such a God? Ac­
cording to the following Scriptures, how has God revealed Himself (i.e. made Himself 
known) to men?
According to the words of  Jesus in 
a. 
John 6:46, has any man ever seen the Father? Who has 
seen the Father?
If  no one has ever seen God the Father except for the Son, how has the Father made Himself  
b. 
known to men? How can we understand who God is? Who can explain such things to us? 
What does John 1:18 teach us?


--- PAGE BREAK ---

22  The One True God
According to the following Scriptures, why is Jesus uniquely qualified to show us God the 
c. 
Father?
Colossians 1:15
John 14:9
God is Personal
O
ne of the most important truths of Scripture is that God is not an impersonal 
force thoughtlessly moving the universe, nor is He a capricious power, coldly 
manipulating His creation for some selfish end. The Scriptures teach us that God is a 
personal being who is aware of His own existence, who possesses both an intellect and a 
will, and who is capable of entering into a personal relationship with man.
God is Aware of His Own Existence
It may seem unnecessary to say that God is aware of His own existence, but this is 
one of the most fundamental characteristics of a “person.” There are many religions 
outside of Christianity whose concept of “god” is either that of an impersonal force 
(Buddhism, Taoism, etc.), or an essence that dwells within all things (Pantheism [Greek: 
pan, all + theos, god]). The God of the Scriptures is a real person, who is aware of His 
own existence as distinct from all other beings and things.
That God is aware of His own existence is clearly revealed in the Scriptures. How 
1. 
does God refer to Himself in Exodus 3:14?
I A
a. 
m.
Note: This declaration is a powerful affirmation that God recognizes His own existence as a 
person. He knows that He is—and He declares, “I AM.”


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Spirit  23
The Scriptures not only teach us that God is aware of His own existence, but that 
2. 
He is aware of His individuality (i.e. He is distinct from all other persons and things). 
According to the Scriptures, what does God declare about His own unique existence 
apart from anyone or anything else?
There is no O
a. 
ther God besides Him (Isaiah 45:21).
There is none E
b. 
xcept Him (Isaiah 45:21).
There is none to whom we may L
c. 
iken (or compare) God (Isaiah 40:25).
There is none that is His E
d. 
Oual (Isaiah 40:25).
Note: Each one of these declarations proves that God is a person who is distinct and inde­
pendent from all other persons and things.
God Possesses an Intellect
The intellect is considered to be one of the primary characteristics of personhood. 
The word comes from the Latin word intellegere [inter, between or among + legere, to pick 
or choose] and refers to the ability to reason, perceive, or understand. According to the 
Scriptures, God possesses an intellect that goes far beyond human comprehension. Noth­
ing is beyond His knowledge or understanding. 
What do the following Scriptures teach us about God’s intellect?
1. 
Psalm 92:5-6
Romans 11:33-36


--- PAGE BREAK ---

24  The One True God
According to the following Scriptures, how is the intellect or understanding of man 
2. 
described in comparison with that of God?
Psalm 94:11; I Corinthians 3:20
Isaiah 55:8-9
I Corinthians 1:20, 25
God’s knowledge and understanding is far beyond the comprehension of finite men. 
3. 
According to the following Scriptures, how may man come to understand (at least, in 
part) the infinite things of God?
Through the Son of  God (
a. 
John 1:18).
Through the Spirit of  God (
b. 
I Corinthians 2:11-12).


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Spirit  25
Through the Word of  God (
c. 
Psalm 119:97-100).
In Deuteronomy 29:29, the Scriptures declare: “The secret things belong to the LORD 
4. 
our God, but the things revealed belong to us…” According to Psalm 131:1-3, how 
should we live (i.e. what should be our attitude) in light of the infinite knowledge of 
God?
God Possesses a Will
The Scriptures clearly reveal that God possesses a will—the power to determine His 
actions (i.e. what He will do) and the purpose, or end of His creation (i.e. what He will 
do with what He has made). God’s choices flow from who He is; His will is an expression 
of His being and disposition. It is important to understand that the will of God and the 
will of man are two very different things. God is the only one who is completely free to do 
whatever He purposes in Himself without limitations or the possibility of  failure. By contrast, 
the most resolute decisions of the most powerful men often come to nothing. 
What do the following Scriptures teach us about the will of God? Are there any limi­
1. 
tations to the will of God? Can the will of God be thwarted in any way by man?
Proverbs 19:21
Isaiah 14:27


--- PAGE BREAK ---

26  The One True God
Isaiah 46:9-10
Daniel 4:34-35
Ephesians 1:11
Although God’s will cannot be limited by any person or force outside of Himself, 
2. 
there are some things that God will not do simply because they contradict His most 
holy and righteous character. According to the following Scriptures, what are some 
things that God will not do? How is this a comfort and a blessing to us?
Titus 1:2
II Timothy 2:13
James 1:13


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Spirit  27
God is Relational
It is the testimony of Scripture that God desires a personal relationship with His 
creation, and especially with man who has been created in His image. This is one of the 
greatest truths of Christianity. God is not an impersonal “it” that is incapable of entering 
into a relationship with others, and man is not a cosmic accident alone in the universe. 
God created man so that man might know Him and be a recipient of His goodness. 
When man’s relationship with God was broken through sin God sent His own Son in 
order that the relationship might be restored. Those who have been reconciled with God 
through faith in His Son may have the greatest confidence that God seeks a personal, 
vital, and growing relationship with them.
From Genesis to Revelation, the Scriptures portray God as one who desires to enter 
1. 
into fellowship with His creation. It is proper to say that the Bible is the history of God 
seeking to restore His relationship with man that was broken through Adam’s rebel­
lion. According to the Scriptures, what was the result of Adam’s sin?
How did Adam’s sin affect his attitude toward God (
a. 
Genesis 3:8-10)?
How did Adam’s sin affect God’s relationship with him (
b. 
Genesis 3:23-24)?
How does 
2. 
Isaiah 59:1-2 explain the change in God’s relationship with Adam? What 
does it teach us about our own sin and how it affects our relationship with God?


--- PAGE BREAK ---

28  The One True God
According to 
3. 
Genesis 3:8-9, who sought after Adam and Eve immediately after their 
fall? What does this teach us about God’s character and His desire to have a relation­
ship with fallen man?
According to 
4. 
Acts 17:26-27, why has God sovereignly determined the times and 
places in which all men are born and live? How does this demonstrate that God is 
relational and desires to have a relationship with fallen man?
According to 
5. 
Luke 19:10, why did God send His Son to earth? What was the purpose 
of His incarnation? How does this demonstrate that God is relational and desires to 
have a relationship with fallen man?
According to the following Scriptures, what has the Son of God accomplished so that 
6. 
man’s broken relationship with God might be restored?
Romans 5:8-10
Colossians 1:19-22


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Spirit  29
According to 
7. 
John 17:3, what is the essence of eternal life? How does this demon­
strate that God is relational and desires to have a relationship with His people?
Note: The word know means a great deal more than simply impersonal knowledge. It denotes 
an intimate personal relationship. Eternal life is much more than a life of infinite duration. It 
is a life of unbroken fellowship with God.
As Christians, we have a restored relationship with God. Therefore, we should live a 
8. 
life that is separated from anything that might be an obstacle to our fellowship with 
Him. What do the following Scriptures teach us about this truth?
II Corinthians 6:16-18
II Timothy 2:19
As Christians, we not only have the responsibility to watch over our relationship with 
9. 
God, but we also have the responsibility to announce the Gospel to others so that they 
might also enter into the same restored relationship with God. What does II Corin­
thians 5:18-20 teach us about this truth?


--- PAGE BREAK ---

“For I proclaim the name of the LORD; Ascribe greatness 
to our God! The Rock! His work is perfect, For all His ways 
are just; A God of faithfulness and without injustice, 
Righteous and upright is He.”
– Deuteronomy 32:3-4 –


--- PAGE BREAK ---

  31
Lesson Three
God is Great 
and Perfect
God is Great
T
here is only one God and He alone is great. All other beings and things are 
totally dependent upon His goodness and strength. If such is the case for even 
the most esteemed among men and angels, how could we ever attribute greatness to 
any being or thing other than God? A comparison should never be made between God 
and any other creature or thing. As the self-existent and infinite Creator, He is infinitely 
above His dependent and finite creation. The mightiest archangel is no closer to being 
like God than the tiniest microbe. God is incomparable. In the context of the body of 
believers, this truth is extremely important. There are no great men or women of God in 
the Scriptures or in Church history; but only weak, sinful, faithless men and women of 
a great and merciful God.
How is God described in the following Scriptures?
1. 
The Lord is a great G
a. 
od and a great King (Psalm 95:3).
The Lord is the G
b. 
reat and Awesome God (Daniel 9:4). The word awe­
some comes from the Hebrew word yare’ which means to fear, revere, or be afraid. 
Even the smallest revelation of God’s greatness and holiness would strike even the 
most splendid of His creatures with astonishment, reverence, and even terror. God 
is awesome, and therefore He is worthy of the greatest reverence.
The Lord is very G
c. 
reat; He is clothed with Splender and Majesty 
(Psalm 104:1). God’s splendor and majesty are not something external that He puts 
on, but are a part of His very being. Unlike men, God has no need to add some­


--- PAGE BREAK ---

32  The One True God
thing to Himself to enhance His greatness or His beauty. God is so much greater 
than any other thing that to add anything to Him would be to diminish Him.
How is the greatness of God described in 
2. 
Psalm 145:3?
His greatness is U
a. 
nsearchable. The word refers to that which is be­
yond investigation or inquiry—a thing that cannot be searched out or measured. 
It would be far easier to count the sand on all the shores and deserts of the world, 
or to number all the stars in space than to measure the greatness of God.
What do the following Scriptures affirm about the greatness of God? How is the one 
3. 
true God contrasted with all other so-called gods?
Psalm 77:13
Psalm 86:10
Psalm 95:3
Psalm 135:5


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Great and Perfect  33
According to the following Scriptures, what should be our attitude and our response 
4. 
to the greatness of God? How shall we live in light of His unsearchable greatness?
Deuteronomy 32:3
I Chronicles 16:25
Psalm 104:1
Psalm 111:2
Psalm 138:5


--- PAGE BREAK ---

34  The One True God
God is Perfect
T
he Scriptures teach us that God is perfect, complete, and lacking in nothing in 
His person and works. God is not only morally perfect, but He is perfect in every 
aspect of who He is and what He does. There is no possibility of defect in God. The 
perfection of God has many important implications for us: (1) It assures us that God 
will not change. He cannot become better than He is because He is already perfect, and 
He cannot become less because He would cease to be God. (2) It assures us that God is 
worthy of our absolute trust.
The Works of God are Perfect
God is perfect in every aspect of His character. The works of God, being an exten­
sion of His character, are also perfect. The implications of this truth are tremendous and 
should produce in us a confidence that will prevail against the greatest doubts and the 
most difficult trials. All that God has ever done or ever will do, in the universe and in 
each of us, is perfect.
What do the following Scriptures teach us about the perfection of God’s works?
1. 
Deuteronomy 32:3-4
Psalm 18:30-31
Psalm 111:7-8


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Great and Perfect  35
Ecclesiastes 3:14
God not only works in His creation, but He works especially in His people. Every 
2. 
Christian is a work of God. What do the following Scriptures teach us about this 
truth?
Ephesians 2:10
Philippians 2:13
Philippians 1:6
The God of all creation is working in the life of every Christian. His work is perfect 
3. 
and will be accomplished without fail. This truth goes beyond what the human mind 
can comprehend—the perfect God is doing a perfect work in us to make us perfect. Accord­
ing to the following Scriptures, how should we respond to this truth?
Psalm 92:4


--- PAGE BREAK ---

36  The One True God
Psalm 107:22
Philippians 2:12-13
The Will of God is Perfect
The will of God is perfect because it is founded upon His perfect and most holy 
character. The implications of this truth are far-reaching. His purpose and plan for us is 
worthy of absolute trust. We should never lean upon our own understanding or seek to 
do that which is only right in our own eyes. Rather, we should trust in God and obey His 
Word, the Holy Scriptures.
 How is the will of God described in 
1. 
Romans 12:2?
G
a.  ood. The word refers to that which is excellent, honorable, agreeable, pleas­
ant and useful, something that brings joy or happiness.
A
b.  cceptable. The word refers to that which is pleasing, approved, or 
acceptable.
P
c.  erfect. The word refers to that which is complete and lacking in noth­
ing.
How should this description motivate us to live a life of  obedience to the will of  God?
d. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Great and Perfect  37
According to the following Scriptures, what should be our response to the good, ac­
2. 
ceptable, and perfect will of God?
According to 
a. 
Matthew 6:9-10, how should we pray concerning the will of  God?
According to the following Scriptures, how should we do the will of  God?
b. 
Psalm 40:8
Ephesians 6:6
How does the life of  the Lord Jesus Christ demonstrate a correct attitude and response to the 
c. 
will of  God? How should we imitate Him?
John 4:32-34
John 5:30


--- PAGE BREAK ---

38  The One True God
One of the most important truths in Christianity is that the 
3. 
will of  God is revealed first 
and foremost through the Word of  God (i.e. the Scriptures). Like the will of God, the 
Word of God is perfect because God is its Author and its Preserver. What do the fol­
lowing Scriptures teach us with regard to this truth?
Psalm 19:7-9
Psalm 12:6
II Timothy 3:16-17
The Word of God is the primary means through which the will of God is revealed. 
4. 
According to the following Scriptures, what should be our attitude and response to 
this truth?
Psalm 119:47
Psalm 119:127-128


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Great and Perfect  39
Psalm 119:167
II Timothy 2:15


--- PAGE BREAK ---

“Before the mountains were born or You gave birth to the 
earth and the world, even from everlasting to everlasting, 
You are God.”
– Psalm 90:2 –
“For I, the LORD, do not change…”
– Malachi 3:6 –


--- PAGE BREAK ---

  41
Lesson Four
God is Eternal, 
Self-Existent, and 
Immutable
God is Eternal
O
ne of the most amazing attributes of God, and one of the many that distinguish 
Him from all creation is His eternal existence—He is without beginning and 
without end. There was never a time when He did not exist and there will never be a time 
when His existence will cease. He is before all things and will remain after all things have 
passed away. The eternality of God does not simply mean that He has and will exist for 
an infinite number of years, but also that He is timeless and ageless, always existing and 
never changing. No other person or created thing shares this attribute with Him. We are 
for only a moment, but He is forever. We were caused by Him, but He was caused by no 
one. We depend upon Him for our very existence, but He depends upon nothing. Our 
earthly existence passes away like sand through an hourglass, but He always remains. He 
was God, is God, and will be God forever.
In the Scripture, a person’s name has great significance and often reveals something 
1. 
about the person who bears it. What are the names given to God in the following 
Scriptures and what do they teach us about His eternality?
I A
a. 
m Who I Am (Exodus 3:14). The idea that is communicated in this statement 
is that existence is an attribute of God’s very nature. Unlike man, God does not 
will to exist, or make an effort to exist. He simply is.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

42  The One True God
The E
b. 
verlasting God (Isaiah 40:28). One who is everlasting will last for­
ever. When applied to God, the word not only refers to the future, but to the past. 
Not only will He always be, but He has always been.
The A
c. 
ncient of  Days (Daniel 7:9). When used with reference to men, 
the word ancient usually denotes old age and weakness of mind and body. When 
used with reference to God, it denotes the grandeur, splendor, power, and wisdom 
of the One who was before the very foundations of the world and will continue 
when the world has passed away.
The A
d. 
lpha and the Omega (Revelation 1:8). The first and last letters of 
the Greek alphabet. It is a colorful way of communicating that God is the first 
and the last (see Isaiah 44:6). He is before all things and will continue on when all 
things have passed.
Having considered the names of God that speak of His eternal nature, we will now 
2. 
consider some of the most important declarations made in Scripture. What do the 
following Scriptures teach us about the eternal nature of God and His relationship to 
His creation? How do they demonstrate His greatness?
Job 36:26
Psalm 90:2
Psalm 90:4


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Eternal, Self-Existent, and Immutable  43
II Peter 3:8
God is eternal, without beginning or end. What are the implications of His eternal­
3. 
ity for all of creation, and especially for the people of God? What do the following 
Scriptures teach us? Write your thoughts.
God’s Reign is Eternal:
a. 
Jeremiah 10:10
Psalm 145:13
Psalm 45:6
God’s Word is Eternal:
b. 
Isaiah 40:6-8; I Peter 1:24-25


--- PAGE BREAK ---

44  The One True God
His Salvation and Care for His People is Eternal:
c. 
Deuteronomy 33:27
Psalm 48:14
Psalm 102:27-28
Isaiah 26:3-4
Isaiah 40:28-31
Matthew 28:20


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Eternal, Self-Existent, and Immutable  45
What should be our response to the truth of God’s eternality? What should be our 
4. 
attitude and how should we live before Him? What do the following Scriptures teach 
us?
I Chronicles 16:36
Daniel 4:34
I Timothy 1:17
God is Self-Existent
O
ne of the most awe-inspiring and humbling truths about God is that He is ab­
solutely free from any need or dependence. His existence, the fulfillment of His 
will, and His happiness or good pleasure do not depend upon anyone or anything outside 
of Himself. He is the only being who is truly self-existent, self-sustaining, self-sufficient, 
independent, and free. All other beings derive their life and blessedness from God, but all 
that is necessary for God’s existence and perfect happiness is found in Himself. God has 
no lack or need, and is dependent upon no one. To teach or even suggest that God made 
man because He was lonely or incomplete is absurd and even blasphemous. Creation is 
not the result of some lack in God, but the result of His fullness or the overflow of His 
abundance. To teach that God somehow needs our help to make things run rightly in the 
world is equally absurd and blasphemous. He did not create because He had a need, but 
because He desired to make known the superabundance of His perfections, glory, and 
goodness.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

46  The One True God
In the Scriptures, a name has great significance, in that it often reveals something 
1. 
about one’s person or character. What name does God ascribe to Himself in Exodus 
3:14? What does it communicate to us about His self-sufficiency?
I A
a. 
m Who I Am (Exodus 3:14). The name demonstrates that God’s existence was 
not caused, nor does it depend upon anything or anyone outside of Himself. It is 
God’s nature to exist and so He simply is—without effort. God has no need that 
must be met, no void that must be filled, and no purpose that requires the aid of 
another. In I Corinthians 15:10, the apostle Paul declared that which is true of all 
men, “By the grace of God I am what I am.” Only God is able to declare, “I AM 
WHO I AM by virtue of my own perfections and power.”
What do the following Scriptures teach us about the self-existence, self-sufficiency, or 
2. 
fullness of God? How does such an attribute demonstrate God’s greatness?
Psalm 36:9
John 5:26
Note: God’s life or existence is not derived from anyone or anything outside of Himself. He 
is life. It is His very nature to exist. The existence of all other things—visible or invisible, ani­
mate or inanimate—depends upon Him. Only God is truly free of need or dependence.
The self-sufficiency of God is a declaration of His infinite greatness and His exalted 
3. 
place above His creation. All things depend upon Him for their very existence and 
yet He depends upon no one. In Acts 17:22-31, we find the Apostle Paul’s sermon 
to the Epicurean and Stoic philosophers on Mars Hill. In verses 24-25, He refutes 
their idolatrous views by making three very important declarations about the one true 
God. What do these declarations teach us about the self-sufficiency of God and His 
relationship to His creation?


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Eternal, Self-Existent, and Immutable  47
God does not dwell in temples made with hands (v.24).
a. 
God is not served by human hands (v.25).
b. 
God does not need anything (v.25).
c. 
To conclude our study of God’s self-sufficiency, we will consider 
4. 
Psalm 50:8-15. What 
does this Scripture teach us about God’s self-sufficiency and our relationship with 
Him? Does God need anything from us? What does God desire from His people?
God is Immutable
T
he word immutable comes from the Latin word immutabilis [in or im, not + 
mutabilis, mutable or changing]. Other words such as unchanging, constant, and 
faithful are also helpful in understanding this divine attribute. The immutability of God 
means that He never changes in His attributes or counsel. God does not grow, evolve, 
or improve because He is already perfect. He cannot diminish, deteriorate, or regress 
because He would no longer be God. Whatever God is, He has always been, and always 
will be. He does not change His mind, or overrule one decree with another. He does not 
make a promise and then change His vow. He does not threaten and then not fulfill. This 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

48  The One True God
is especially comforting, since the possibility of an Almighty God suddenly becoming 
evil or suddenly changing His mind is utterly terrifying. The immutability of God is one 
of His most important attributes because it guarantees that He and His Word will be the 
same yesterday, today, and forever. He is the only constant in the universe, the only Being 
worthy of absolute trust.
In the Scriptures, a name has great significance, often revealing something about the 
1. 
person who bears it. What are the names given to God in the following Scriptures and 
what do they teach us about His immutability?
I A
a. 
m Who I Am (Exodus 3:14). The name is derived of the Hebrew verb hayah, which 
means to be or to exist. It points not only to God’s eternal nature and self-existence, but 
also to His immutability. He not only always is, but always is the same.
The R
b. 
ock (Deuteronomy 32:4). This name needs little explanation. Within cre­
ation there are few things more permanent or unchanging than stone and rock, 
and the mountains they form. It is a comfort to know that even this metaphor is 
inadequate. When all the rocks of this earth have turned to dust, God will remain 
unchanged.
Having considered the names of God that speak of His immutability, we will now 
2. 
turn to some of the most important declarations made in Scripture. What do they 
teach us about the unchanging nature of God and His relationship to His creation? 
How do they demonstrate His greatness?
Psalm 102:25-27
Malachi 3:6
Hebrews 13:8


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Eternal, Self-Existent, and Immutable  49
James 1:17
Having considered the many Scriptures that speak of the immutability of God’s na­
3. 
ture, we will now consider those passages that specifically speak of the immutability 
of His Word and Counsel. What do the following Scriptures teach us about their 
unchanging nature? What do they teach us about God’s relationship to His creation—
especially to man?
I Samuel 15:29
Numbers 23:19
Psalm 33:11
Note: In I Samuel 15:29, the Scriptures declare that God “is not man that He should change 
His mind.” From this passage and others, it is clear that God’s immutability extends even to 
His counsel and will. He is perfect in wisdom and therefore does not err in what He decrees; 
He is all-powerful and therefore is able to do all He has decided. But how do we reconcile 
this teaching with other Scriptures that seem to teach the contrary? In Genesis 6:6, God 
“was sorry that He had made man.” In Exodus 32:9-14, the Lord “changed His mind” about 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

50  The One True God
destroying the disobedient nation of Israel. Finally, in Jonah 3:10, God “relented” concern­
ing the calamity which He had declared He would bring upon the city of Nineveh. Do the 
Scriptures contradict themselves? Does God indeed change His mind? The answer is not as 
complex or mysterious as one might think. 
The Scriptures clearly teach that God’s perfections, purposes, and promises are always 
the same. But this does not mean that His relationship and disposition toward His “always 
changing” creation cannot vary. Genesis 6:6 simply refers to God’s holy response to man’s sin 
and His determination to blot out man from the face of the earth—v.7 (the same in I Samuel 
15:11, 26). In Exodus 32:9-14, God “changed His mind” with regard to Israel’s destruction 
as a gracious answer to Moses’ prayer (a prayer that God led and empowered Moses to 
pray). In Jonah 3:4-10, God simply “relented” from destroying Nineveh when Nineveh “re­
lented” from its sin. These passages are reminders to us that the immutability of God does 
not mean immobility. He does not change, but He is not static, apathetic, and uninvolved 
with His creation. He is dynamic and interacts with His creation. He is always the same, but 
His relationship and dealings with mutable men will vary according to how they respond to 
Him (Jeremiah 18:7-10; Ezekiel 18:21-24). This is not a contradiction to His immutability, 
but proof of it. He will always respond to men’s actions in a manner consistent with His 
unchanging attributes. 
It is important to understand that God’s immutability not only depends upon His per­
4. 
fection, but also upon His power. God would not be immutable if there existed some 
being or power greater than Himself that could coerce or manipulate Him. What do 
the following Scriptures teach us about the sovereignty and power of God? Is there 
any created being or thing that can “change” God?
Isaiah 14:24
Isaiah 46:9-10


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Eternal, Self-Existent, and Immutable  51
Daniel 4:34-35


--- PAGE BREAK ---

“Ah Lord GOD! Behold, You have made the heavens and the 
earth by Your great power and by Your outstretched arm! 
Nothing is too difficult for You.”
– Jeremiah 32:17 –
“‘Am I a God who is near,’ declares the LORD, ‘And not a God 
far off? Can a man hide himself in hiding places so I do 
not see him?’ declares the LORD. ‘Do I not fill the heavens 
and the earth?’ declares the LORD.”
– Jeremiah 23:23-24 –


--- PAGE BREAK ---

  53
Lesson Five
God is 
Omnipotent, 
Omnipresent, and 
Omniscient
God is Omnipotent
T
he word omnipotent comes from the Latin word omnipotens [omnis, all  +  potens, 
powerful] and refers to the attribute of having infinite or unlimited power. With 
regard to God, the word means that He can do all that He has determined to do and no 
person or force can hinder Him or oblige Him to do the contrary. To say that God can 
do all things means that He can do all that is in agreement with His most holy, righteous, 
and loving nature. He cannot contradict Himself—He cannot be cruel or selfish; He can­
not lie; He cannot break a promise; He cannot do the absurd (i.e. make square circles, 
triangles with four corners, or rocks so heavy that He cannot move them). For the Chris­
tian, the omnipotence of God instills absolute confidence. God is powerful to do all that 
He has promised. For the unbeliever, the omnipotence of God instills terror because no 
man can resist His will or escape His judgment.
In the Scripture, a person’s name has great significance and frequently reveals some­
1. 
thing about his character. What are the names and titles given to God in the following 
Scriptures?
God A
a. 
lmighty (Genesis 17:1; Revelation 4:8; 19:6).
The Lord S
b. 
trong and Mighty (Psalm 24:8).


--- PAGE BREAK ---

54  The One True God
A R
c. 
ock of  Strength (Psalm 31:2).
A T
d. 
ower of  Strength (Psalm 61:3).
M
e. 
ighty God (Isaiah 9:6; Isaiah 10:21).
The M
f. 
ighty One (Luke 1:49).
What do the following Scriptures teach about the omnipotence of God? Is there any­
2. 
thing beyond the power of God?
Jeremiah 32:17, 27
Matthew 19:26; Luke 1:37
One of the most important implications of the omnipotence of God is that it assures 
3. 
us that He is able to carry out all that He has determined to do. What do the following 
Scriptures teach us about this truth?
Job 42:1-2
Psalm 115:3


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Omnipotent, Omnipresent, and Omniscient  55
Psalm 135:5-6
Isaiah 14:24, 27
Daniel 4:35
Ephesians 1:11
In the Scriptures, the omnipotence of God is one of the attributes that most distin­
4. 
guish Him from the lifeless idols that men are so prone to create.
In 
a. 
Psalm 115:3-8, how is the omnipotent God of  the Scriptures contrasted with the worth­
less idols of  men?


--- PAGE BREAK ---

56  The One True God
According to 
b. 
Psalm 115:9-11, how should believers respond to this truth?
The omnipotence of God has great implications for the Christian that trusts in Him, 
5. 
His will, and His promises. According to the following Scriptures, what does the 
omnipotence of God mean for those of us who believe?
Joshua 23:14
Psalm 121:4-5
Romans 8:31
Philippians 1:6


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Omnipotent, Omnipresent, and Omniscient  57
II Corinthians 3:4-5
Philippians 4:13
According to the following Scriptures, the Christian should respond to the 
6. 
omnipotence of God with both faith and obedience. Write your thoughts regarding 
this truth.
Faith (
a. 
Romans 4:19-21)
Obedience (
b. 
Genesis 17:1)
God is Omnipresent
T
he word omnipresent comes from the Latin word omnipraesens [omnis, all  +  praes­
ens, present] and refers to the state of being present everywhere at once. When 
the Scriptures speak of God as omnipresent, it means that He is always present in every 
place in His fullness. Omnipresence does not mean that part of God is in China and 
another part of God is in England, but that all of God is everywhere at once. Although 
the universe itself cannot contain God, God is present in all His fullness in every place. 
For the Christian, the omnipresence of God instills great confidence and comfort—every 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

58  The One True God
believer, from the greatest to the smallest, benefits from God’s undivided presence. For 
the unbeliever, the omnipresence of God instills terror because there is no possibility of 
hiding or escaping from His presence.
In I Kings 8 is found an account of the dedication of the temple of God that Solomon 
1. 
built in Jerusalem. What did Solomon declare in I Kings 8:27? What does his declara­
tion teach us about the omnipresence of God? According to this text, should we think 
that God is somehow confined to our modern day ‘church buildings’?
In the following Scriptures are found several important texts regarding the omnipres­
2. 
ence of God and its implications for all men. Write a summary of each Scripture in 
your own words.
Psalm 139:7-10
Jeremiah 23:23-24
Acts 17:24-28
In the following Scriptures are found several important texts regarding the omnipres­
3. 
ence of God with a special emphasis on its significance for His people. Summarize the 
truth of each text in your own words.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Omnipotent, Omnipresent, and Omniscient  59
Deuteronomy 4:7
Psalm 46:1
Psalm 145:18
Isaiah 43:1-2
Matthew 18:20
Matthew 28:20


--- PAGE BREAK ---

60  The One True God
God is Omniscient
T
he word omniscient comes from the Latin word omnisciens [omnis, all  +  sciens, 
from scire, to know] and refers to the attribute of possessing all knowledge. The 
omniscience of God means that He possesses perfect knowledge of all things past, pres­
ent, and future—immediately, effortlessly, simultaneously, and exhaustively. There is 
nothing hidden from God. There is never the slightest difference between God’s knowl­
edge and what really is. He not only knows all the facts, but He interprets them with per­
fect wisdom. For the Christian, the omniscience of God instills great confidence and 
comfort—God knows our every need, He understands our every trial, and He has given 
us His infallible Word to guide us through life. For the unbeliever, the omniscience of 
God instills terror because God will judge every man according to His perfect knowledge 
of all the facts—no sin will be hidden or forgotten. Every creature, every deed, and every 
thought is before Him like an open book.
In the Scriptures, a name has great significance and often communicates something 
1. 
about the person who bears it. What is the name given to God in I Samuel 2:3 and 
what does it communicate to us about His omniscience?
The God of  K
a. 
nowledge.
In 
2. 
Daniel 2:20-22 is found one of Scripture’s most beautiful descriptions of the 
knowledge of God. What does this text teach us?
In the following Scriptures, several words are used to describe God’s omniscience. 
3. 
Through our understanding of these words, we can begin to grasp something of the 
greatness of God’s knowledge. Identify each word according to the verse given:
God’s knowledge is P
a. 
erfect (Job 37:16). The word refers to that which is 
whole, complete, entire, not lacking.
God’s understanding is I
b. 
nfinite (Psalm 147:4-5). The word refers to that 
which is innumerable, beyond counting.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Omnipotent, Omnipresent, and Omniscient  61
God’s understanding is I
c. 
nscrutable (Isaiah 40:28). The word refers to 
that which is beyond investigation or inquiry.
It is important to understand that God’s knowledge is not limited to the present, but 
4. 
that He knows all things past, present, and future. What do the following Scriptures 
from Isaiah 44:6-8 and Isaiah 46:9-10 teach us about this truth?
In 
5. 
Psalm 139:1-4 and 11-12 is found one of the most beautiful and thorough descrip­
tions of the omniscience of God and of His knowledge of the deeds of men. Accord­
ing to the outline given below, describe the extent of God’s omniscience:
Verse 1
a. 
Verse 2
b. 
Verse 3
c. 
Verse 4
d. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

62  The One True God
Verses 11-12
e. 
According to the Scriptures, there is no depth or secret in the heart of man that is be­
6. 
yond the reach of God’s knowledge. What do the following Scriptures teach us about 
this truth? According to each Scripture, complete the declaration.
I Kings 8:39
a. 
: God alone knows the Hearts of  all men.
Psalm 7:9
b. 
: God Tries the Hearts and Minds.
Psalm 94:11
c. 
: God knows the Thoughts of  man.
Romans 2:16
d. 
: God will Judge the Secrets of  all men.
For the Christian, the omniscience of God instills great confidence, comfort and joy. 
7. 
We can rest secure that God is always watching us, and that He knows our every need 
and understands our every trial. What do the following Scriptures teach us about this 
truth?
II Chronicles 16:9
Matthew 6:7-8, 31-32
Matthew 10:29-31


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Omnipotent, Omnipresent, and Omniscient  63
As we have learned, the omniscience of God does not produce the same reaction in 
8. 
every man. All depends upon one’s relationship with God. For the unbeliever, the 
omniscience of God instills terror because God will judge every man according to His 
perfect knowledge of all the facts—no sin will be hidden or forgotten. Every creature, 
every deed, and every thought is before Him like an open book. What do the following 
Scriptures teach us about this truth?
Job 34:21-23
Psalm 33:13-15
Proverbs 5:21
Proverbs 15:3
Jeremiah 17:10


--- PAGE BREAK ---

64  The One True God
Jeremiah 32:19
Hebrews 4:13


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---

“In the year of King Uzziah’s death I saw the Lord sitting 
on a throne, lofty and exalted, with the train of His robe 
filling the temple. Seraphim stood above Him, each having 
six wings: with two he covered his face, and with two he 
covered his feet, and with two he flew. And one called 
out to another and said, ‘Holy, Holy, Holy, is the LORD of 
hosts, the whole earth is full of His glory.’ ”
– Isaiah 6:1-3 –


--- PAGE BREAK ---

  67
Lesson Six
God is Holy
The Meaning of Holy
T
he word holy comes from the Hebrew word qadosh that means, separated, marked 
off, placed apart, or withdrawn from common use. With regard to God, the word has 
two important meanings. God is separate from and transcendent above His creation, and 
He is separate from and transcendent above His creation’s corruption.
God is Transcendent above His Creation
The word transcendence comes from the Latin verb transcendere (trans, over + scandere, 
to climb) that means to go beyond, rise above, or exceed. As Creator, God is above all His 
creation and totally distinct from every created being. The distinction between God and 
the rest of His creation is not merely quantitative (the same, but greater), but qualita­
tive (God is a completely different being). Regardless of their splendor, all other beings 
on earth and in heaven are mere creatures. God alone is God; separate, transcendent, 
and unapproachable. The most splendid angel that stands in the presence of God is no 
more truly like God than the smallest worm that crawls upon the earth. God is incom­
parable! 
Holiness is the preeminent attribute of God and the greatest truth that we can ever 
learn about Him. Every divine attribute that can be studied is simply an expression of 
His holiness in that it demonstrates that He is distinct from His creation, absolutely sepa­
rate, and a completely different being. The triune nature of God is an expression of His 
holiness. Is there any created being so incomprehensible, mysterious, and wonderful? To 
say that God is Spirit is an expression of His holiness. Is there any created being so free 
and unhindered? The truth of God’s perfection, eternal nature, self-existence, immutabil­
ity, omnipotence, omnipresence, and omniscience are all expressions of His holiness. Is 
there any created being so great and worthy of reverence? As we continue our study of 
the attributes of God and as you walk before Him, keep in mind this one great truth—
God is holy, and all He is and does is an expression of His holiness!


--- PAGE BREAK ---

68  The One True God
God is Transcendent above His Creation’s Corruption
The holiness of God also means that He transcends the moral corruption of His 
creation and is separated from all that is profane and sinful. God cannot sin, cannot take 
pleasure in sin, and cannot have fellowship with sin. It is impossible to overemphasize 
the importance of God’s holiness. What we understand about this attribute will influ­
ence every aspect of our relationship with God. As the Scriptures declare in Proverbs 
9:10, “…the knowledge of the Holy One is understanding.”
The Holiness of God
I
t is important to understand that God’s holiness is intrinsic or inherent (i.e. inward, 
essential, belonging to His nature). Holiness is not merely something that God 
decides to be or do, but it is essential to His very nature—He is holy. God would have 
to cease to be God in order to be unholy. He would have to deny His own nature to do 
something that is unholy. This is a wonderful truth that inspires great confidence in 
God.
In the Scriptures, a name has great significance and communicates something about 
1. 
the person who bears it. What are the names given to God in the following Scriptures 
and what do they communicate to us about His holiness?
I A
a. 
m who I Am (Exodus 3:14). God is holy, separate, and distinct from all other 
beings and things. There is no adequate illustration or example to communicate 
who He truly is. 
Note: If we ask another man to describe himself to us, he can point to other human beings 
and say, “I am like him” or “I am like her.” In contrast, God is incomparable. Not even the 
greatest archangel in heaven is an adequate example of who He is. When Moses asked God, 
“Who are you?” God could only point to Himself and declare: “I Am who I Am.” This truth 
helps us to understand the great importance of the revelation of God in Christ. Jesus is God 
in the flesh and the only true image or example of who God is (John 14:9; Colossians 1:15). 
God now answers every question about Himself by pointing to His Son and declaring, “I am 
like Him!”
H
b.  oly and Awesome (i.e inspiring awe, reverence, fear) is His Name (Psalm 
111:9). A proper understanding of the holiness of God will always result in a pro­
found reverence before God.
The H
c. 
igh and Exalted One Who lives forever, whose name is Holy 
(Isaiah 57:15).


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Holy  69
In the preceding verses, words such as 
d. 
holy, separate, awesome, high, and exalted were 
used to describe the person of  God. What do these words communicate to you about the 
holiness of  God?
In the Scriptures, we find that the holiness of God is both 
2. 
preeminent and transcendent. 
It is preeminent in that no other divine attribute is so often declared and explained in 
the Scriptures. It is transcendent in that there is simply no comparison between the holi­
ness of God and that of any other being or thing.
God’s Holiness is Preeminent 
a. 
[Latin: prae, before + eminere, to project]. It is impos­
sible to understand the character of God apart from His holiness. Above all things, 
God is holy! How is this truth demonstrated in Isaiah 6:3 and Revelation 4:8? 
Note: In Hebrew literature, repetition is used to give emphasis to what is being said. That 
God’s holiness is declared three times (called the trihagion in Greek [tri, thrice + hagios, holy]) 
denotes that God is absolutely and infinitely holy. No other divine attribute is proclaimed 
with such great emphasis. We never read in the Scriptures that God is “love, love, love,” or 
“merciful, merciful, merciful,” but we do read that He is “holy, holy, holy.” Holiness is the 
foundation of all that God is and does. If there is one attribute of God that we simply cannot 
overemphasize, it is His holiness.
God’s Holiness is Transcendent
b. 
 [Latin: trans, across or beyond + scandere, to climb]. 
God’s holiness infinitely surpasses all others. There is none holy like the Lord! 
What do the following Scriptures teach us with regard to this truth?
Exodus 15:11


--- PAGE BREAK ---

70  The One True God
I Samuel 2:2
Job 15:15
Note: This does not mean that there is sin or corruption in heaven, but communicates two 
great truths: (1) Nothing, not even the heavens themselves or those who dwell there, are holy 
like God. (2) God’s holiness alone is intrinsic or inherent (i.e. inward, essential, belonging to 
His nature). Holiness is not merely something that God decides to be or do, but it is essential 
to His very nature—He is holy. In contrast, all other beings and things (even heaven and its 
holy angels) derive their holiness from God. They are not holy in themselves, but their holi­
ness flows from God as a gift of grace to them. If God turned away from them and withdrew 
His grace, they would fall from their holy state into a state of sin and corruption.
Isaiah 40:25
The holiness of God not only means that He is unique among all His creation, but 
3. 
also that He is separated from all that is profane and sinful. God cannot sin, can­
not take pleasure in sin, and cannot have fellowship with sin. There is absolutely no 
possibility that God could be tempted or that His nature could be defiled. He always 
remains as He is—holy and incorruptible. What do the following Scriptures teach us 
about this truth?
Psalm 5:4


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Holy  71
Job 34:10
Isaiah 59:1-2
Habakkuk 1:13a
James 1:13
James 1:17


--- PAGE BREAK ---

72  The One True God
I John 1:5
The holiness of God not only means that He is unique among all His creation and that 
4. 
He is separated from all that contradicts His nature (i.e. sin), but also that He cannot 
take pleasure in sin. God is not neutral or apathetic about evil, but it is an abomination 
to Him (i.e. a loathsome thing that evokes His hatred or disgust). He hates all that is 
evil with a holy passion. What do the following Scriptures teach us about this truth?
Deuteronomy 25:16
Note: The word translated abomination in this passage and in Proverbs 15:8-9 below is from 
the Hebrew word toeba, referring to something or someone who is repugnant (i.e. offensive), 
disgusting, revolting, or obscene. In Psalm 88:8, the word is translated object of  loathing.
Psalm 5:4-5
Note: The popular phrase, “God loves the sinner, but hates the sin” must be re-evaluated in 
the light of Psalm 5:5. God not only hates the sin, but His hatred is also manifested against 
those who practice it! How can this truth be reconciled with other passages of Scripture that 
speak of God’s love for sinners? Though God’s wrath is revealed against the sinner (John 
3:36), He has demonstrated His love by sending His Son to die for the very people who de­
serve only judgment (Romans 5:8, 10). 
Proverbs 15:8-9


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Holy  73
Our Response to God’s Holiness
G
od is holy, holy, holy! Although we have sinned against Him and made our­
selves an abomination before Him, He has reconciled us who believe to Him­
self through the death of His own Son. Having saved us, He has called us to be His spe­
cial people upon the earth. How shall we live in response to this great truth? How shall 
we live before a holy God?
According to the following Scriptures, how important is it that we acknowledge and 
1. 
understand the holiness of God? How important is it that we grow in our own per­
sonal holiness?
Proverbs 9:10
Note: In Proverbs 9:10, we learn that the greatest truth set before men is that God is holy and 
worthy of all reverence and worship. All other knowledge and wisdom (scientific, philosophi­
cal, historical, legal, etc.) is worthless apart from a correct understanding of this truth.
Hebrews 12:14
Note: In Hebrews 12:14, we learn that no unholy or ungodly person will ever be acceptable 
to God. This does not mean that we gain a right standing before God through our own works, 
but that all who are saved by the grace of God will be transformed by that same grace. Our 
growth in holiness is the evidence of our salvation. We are not saved because we are holy, but 
true salvation will always lead to true holiness because as we have already learned, God 
is doing a perfect work in the life of every Christian.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

74  The One True God
According to 
2. 
Hebrews 12:5-11, what does God do to ensure that ALL His children 
share in His holiness (i.e. become holy as He is holy)?
God is holy, holy, holy! How should we live in light of this great truth? In the follow­
3. 
ing Scriptures are listed several appropriate responses to the holiness of God. Read 
each Scripture below and write your comments:
We should live before God with Reverence and Godly Fear:
a. 
Psalm 96:9
Isaiah 6:2-3
Isaiah 8:13
Habakkuk 2:20; Ecclesiastes 5:1-2


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Holy  75
We should live before God with Worship, Gladness, and Thanksgiving:
b. 
Psalm 30:4
Psalm 97:12
Psalm 99:3, 5, 9
Isaiah 12:6
Revelation 15:4
Note: Why is the holiness of God such an astonishing truth to the holy angels who have nev­
er sinned? It is because holiness is not primarily a reference to God’s sinless perfection, but to 
His transcendence above even the greatest of His creatures. The distinction between God and 
the rest of His creation is not merely quantitative (the same, but greater), but qualitative (God 
is a completely different being). Regardless of their splendor, all other beings on earth and in 
heaven are mere creatures. God alone is God—separate, transcendent, and unapproachable. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

76  The One True God
The most splendid angel that stands in the presence of God is no more like God than the 
smallest worm that crawls upon the earth, and therefore even they must bow their heads and 
cry out, “HOLY, HOLY, HOLY!”
We should live before God in Holiness and Obedience:
c. 
Leviticus 20:26
Note: As Christians, God has set us apart from the rest of the peoples on the earth to be His. 
We are to respond by separating ourselves from all that displeases Him and by giving our­
selves to His worship and service.
Leviticus 22:31-33
Note: God has sanctified (i.e. separated) us to be His special people. We are to sanctify the 
Lord (i.e. treat Him as special, honor Him) by keeping His commandments. To break His 
commands is to profane His name (i.e. to treat Him as common or unimportant).
II Corinthians 6:16-7:1
Ephesians 4:22-24


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Holy  77
II Timothy 2:19-21
I Peter 1:14-17
We should live before God with Integrity:
d. 
Psalm 15:1-5
Psalm 24:3-6


--- PAGE BREAK ---

“Righteousness and justice are the foundation of Your 
throne; Lovingkindness and truth go before You.”
– Psalm 89:14 –


--- PAGE BREAK ---

  79
Lesson Seven
God is 
Righteous
The Meaning of Righteous
T
he word righteous is translated from the Hebrew word tsaddik’ and the corre­
sponding Greek term dikaíos. Both terms denote the rightness, correctness, or 
moral excellence of God. According to the Scriptures, God is an absolutely righteous 
being and always acts in a way that is perfectly consistent with who He is. There is noth­
ing wrong or incorrect about God’s nature or His works. He will never be or do anything 
that would justify any accusation of wrongdoing. His works, decrees and judgments are 
absolutely perfect. On that day when God judges all men according to their works, even 
the condemned will bow their heads and declare that God is right!
The Righteousness of God
I
t is important to understand that just like the other attributes of God, God’s righ­
teousness is intrinsic or inherent (i.e. inward, essential, belonging to His nature). 
Righteousness is not merely something that God decides to be or do, but it is essential 
to His very nature—He is righteous. God would have to cease to be God in order to be 
unrighteous. He would have to deny His own nature to do something that is not right. 
This is a wonderful truth that inspires great confidence in God.
In the Scriptures, a name has great significance and regularly communicates some­
1. 
thing about the character of the person who bears it. What is the name given to God 
in Psalm 7:9? What does it communicate to us about the character of His person and 
works?


--- PAGE BREAK ---

80  The One True God
The R
a. 
ighteous God (Psalm 7:9).
In the following verses are some of the most important declarations in the Scriptures 
2. 
with regard to the righteousness of God and His works. Summarize each teaching in 
your own words. Remember, there is a direct relationship between God’s own per­
sonal righteousness and the righteousness of His acts and judgments. God does right 
and judges righteously because God is righteous.
Deuteronomy 32:4
Job 36:23
Psalm 36:6
Note: The metaphors are clear. God’s righteousness is greater and more majestic than the 
highest mountain, and more profound and unfathomable than the deepest sea.
Psalm 89:14; 97:2


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Righteous  81
Psalm 119:142
Jeremiah 9:24
It is important to understand that the justice of God (like His holiness) is transcendent 
3. 
[Latin: trans, across or beyond + scandere, to climb]. God’s righteousness infinitely 
surpasses all others. There is no other who is just and righteous like the Lord. What do 
the following Scriptures teach us about this truth?
Job 4:17-19
Isaiah 5:16
Note: This Scripture means that the Holy God will show Himself to be separate or distinct 
from all others through the righteous acts that He does. God’s holiness (i.e. separateness from 
all other beings and things) is most clearly demonstrated through His righteous deeds. There 
is none holy or righteous like the Lord.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

82  The One True God
Isaiah 45:21
The righteousness of God, like His holiness, is reflected in His attitude toward the 
4. 
deeds of men and angels. God is not morally neutral or apathetic, but He fervently 
loves righteousness and hates all unrighteousness. What do the following Scriptures 
teach us about this truth?
Psalm 7:11-12
Psalm 11:7
The righteousness of God guarantees that God will do no wrong. He will rule over 
5. 
His creation without caprice, partiality, or injustice. What do the following Scriptures 
teach with regard to this truth?
II Chronicles 19:7
Job 8:3; 36:23


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Righteous  83
Psalm 9:7-8
Zephaniah 3:5
Our Response to God’s Righteousness
G
od is righteous! His works and judgments are perfect. How shall we live in re­
sponse to this great truth? How shall we live before such a righteous God? We 
should be righteous for He is righteous; we should worship Him for He is worthy; we 
should be thankful for He is absolutely deserving of our trust; and we should proclaim 
His righteousness to the peoples for His praise is rightly on our lips.
How are we to live before a righteous God? How are we to respond to His righteous 
1. 
deeds and judgments? What do the following Scriptures teach us?
We should Fear the Lord and Live Righteously before God:
a. 
II Chronicles 19:7
Ephesians 4:22-24


--- PAGE BREAK ---

84  The One True God
I John 2:29; 3:7
Note: It is important to understand that we do not gain a right standing before God through 
our righteous deeds, but our righteous deeds are the evidence that God has truly saved us. A 
genuine Christian is not sinless, but he will not live out all the days of his life in sin and rebel­
lion. If someone professes to be a Christian and yet his or her life is marked by unrelenting 
disobedience to God’s Word without repentance or divine discipline, it is certain that their 
profession is not genuine.
We should Live with Great Confidence in God and His Care of  us:
b. 
Psalm 92:15
Isaiah 41:10
Isaiah 42:6
We should Live a Life of  Worship, Praise, and Rejoicing before God:
c. 
Psalm 96:11-13


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Righteous  85
Psalm 145:6-7
Daniel 4:37
Revelation 15:3-4
We should Live a Life of  Prayer before God:
d. 
Psalm 145:17-19
Luke 18:7-8


--- PAGE BREAK ---

86  The One True God
We should Proclaim the Righteousness of  God to all Peoples:
e. 
Psalm 40:10
Psalm 71:15-16
Psalm 145:3, 6-7
Psalm 147:1
Jeremiah 9:23-24
I Peter 2:9


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---

“But the LORD is the true God; He is the living God and the 
everlasting King. At His wrath the earth quakes and the 
nations cannot endure His indignation.”
– Jeremiah 10:10 –
“God is not a man, that He should lie, nor a son of man, 
that He should repent; Has He said, and will He not do it? 
Or has He spoken, and will He not make it good?”
– Numbers 23:19 –


--- PAGE BREAK ---

  89
Lesson Eight
God is True 
and Truthful
The Integrity of God
T
he word integrity comes from the Latin word integer that refers to anything com­
plete or whole. When used with reference to God, the word means that God’s 
character is whole, flawless, or unimpaired. There are three words that may be employed 
to describe God’s integrity: (1) God is True—He is real; not fabricated, invented, or an 
imitation. (2) God is Truthful—He only acts and speaks within the realm of the truth. 
Falsehood is contrary to His nature. (3) God is Faithful—He will do all that He has 
promised.
God is Genuine or True
I
n the Scriptures, the word true is translated from the Hebrew word ’emeth and the 
Greek word alethinós. Both words not only denote the truthfulness of God, but also 
His authenticity. God is genuine or real. He is exactly as He reveals Himself to be. He 
is not a counterfeit, a fake, an invention, or a mere imitation. He is the one true God—
distinct from the idols made by the hands of men and the false gods born in the corrupt 
imaginations of men.
In the Scriptures, a name is often the means through which the character of a person 
1. 
is revealed. What are the names ascribed to God in the following Scriptures? What do 
they reveal about His authenticity? Write your thoughts.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

90  The One True God
But the LORD is the T
a. 
rue God; He is the Living God and the everlasting King 
(Jeremiah 10:10).
The O
b. 
nly True God (John 17:3).
The L
c. 
iving and True God (I Thessalonians 1:9).
The Lord H
d. 
oly and True (Revelation 6:10).
Note: The words only and living are very important. They are used in the above Scriptures to 
contrast the only living God with the multitude of lifeless idols made by men.
What do the following Scriptures teach us about the uniqueness and authenticity of 
2. 
God? Is there any true and living God other than the God of the Scriptures?
II Samuel 7:22


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is True and Truthful  91
I Kings 8:60
Isaiah 46:9
To fully understand the significance and importance of the truth we have learned, we 
3. 
must consider the Scriptures that contrast the one true God with the lifeless idols and 
false gods of men. What do the following Scriptures teach us about the uniqueness 
and authenticity of God compared to false gods and lifeless idols?
Psalm 115:3-9
Isaiah 46:5-10
In 
4. 
Jeremiah 10:3-16 is found an excellent comparison between the one true and living 
God and the lifeless idols and false gods of men. Read the text until you are familiar 
with its contents and then continue with the following exercise:
How are the lifeless idols and false gods of  men described in the following Scriptures?
a. 
Idols are nothing more than a D
i.
elusion (v.3, 8). Idols are a delu­
sion because they are supposed to be a powerful divine being, when in fact 
they are not even alive.
Idols are nothing more than W
ii.
ood cut from the Forest (v.3, 8).


--- PAGE BREAK ---

92  The One True God
Idols are nothing more than the W
iii.
ork of men—a craftsman with a 
cutting tool (v.3, 9).
Idols are nothing more than decorations of S
iv.
ilver and Gold 
(v.4, 9).
Idols are nothing more than lifeless things that must be fastened with 
v.
Hammers and Nails so that they will not Totter 
(v.4).
Idols are like a S
vi.
carecrow in a field (v.5).
Idols cannot S
vii.
peak, and they must be Carried because they 
cannot not Walk (v.5).
Idols can do neither H
viii.
arm nor Good to us (v.5).
Idols are D
ix.
eceitful and there is no Breath in them 
(v.14). Idols are deceitful because they are supposed to be a powerful divine 
being, when in fact they are not even alive.
Idols are W
x.
orthless (v.15).
Idols are a W
xi.
ork of Mockery that will perish under the judg­
ment of God (v.15, 11). Idols are a work of mockery in the sense that they 
are worthy of ridicule.
How are idolaters (i.e. those who trust in and reverence idols) described in the following 
b. 
Scriptures?
They are altogether S
i.
tupid and Foolish (v.8).
They are S
ii.
tupid and Devoid of knowledge (v.14).
They will be put to S
iii.
hame (v.14).
How is the one true God of Scripture described in the following verses? How is He contrasted 
c. 
with the idols and false gods of  men?
Verses 6-7:
i.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is True and Truthful  93
Verse 10:
ii.
Verses 12-13:
iii.
According to verse 7, how should all men respond to the one true God of Scripture?
d. 
In light of what we have learned about the glory of the one true God and the vanity 
5. 
of dumb idols and false gods, how should we live? What do the following Scriptures 
teach us?
Exodus 20:3; 23:13
Exodus 20:4-5, 23; Leviticus 19:4


--- PAGE BREAK ---

94  The One True God
I Thessalonians 1:9
I John 5:20-21
It is extremely important to understand that idolatry can take many forms. If we give 
6. 
preference to anyone or anything above God, then we are guilty of idolatry. The joys 
and pleasures of this present world, careers, ministries, hobbies, and especially self are 
some of the more common idols found among men. Prayerfully consider this truth 
and then answer the following questions: What is most dear to you? What most oc­
cupies your thought life? Do you think most about the excellencies and glory of God, 
honoring God in your family, doing the will of God in your vocation? Or do you think 
most about self, success, possessions, entertainment, hobbies, etc.? Remember: “As a 
man thinks within himself, so is he” (Proverbs 23:7). Are we not all guilty of some 
form or measure of idolatry? Do we not all have the need to repent and seek God’s 
mercy and grace?
God is Truthful
H
aving considered the authenticity of God, we will now turn our attention to­
ward His truthfulness. Not only is God exactly as He reveals Himself to be (i.e. 
He is true), but things are exactly as He says they are (i.e. He is truthful). God only acts 
and speaks within the realm of the truth. His knowledge is perfect and so He is never 
mistaken. His character is holy and righteous; He cannot lie or distort the truth. Misin­
terpretation and falsehood are impossible with God.
In the Scriptures, a name is often the means through which the character of a person 
1. 
is revealed. What are the names and attributes ascribed to God in the following Scrip­
tures?
The God of  T
a. 
ruth (Isaiah 65:16; Psalm 31:5).
God is T
b. 
rue (John 3:33).


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is True and Truthful  95
What do these names reveal to us about God’s truthfulness?
c. 
What do 
2. 
Numbers 23:19 and I Samuel 15:29 teach us about the truthfulness of 
God?
Note: God never lies, repents, or changes His purpose. He is not like men who continually 
change their minds, are often mistaken, and frequently distort the truth. God is true and His 
Word is immutable (i.e. unchanging and unchangeable) truth.
How is the truthfulness of God described in the following Scriptures?
3. 
God’s truthfulness is higher than the very C
a. 
louds of  heaven (Psalm 57:10).
God is A
b. 
bundant in truth (Psalm 86:15).
What do these descriptions reveal to us about God’s truthfulness?
c. 
The truthfulness of God has many great implications, but one of the most important 
4. 
is that we can trust in Him and His every promise. What do the following statements 
teach us about this truth?
God C
a. 
annot lie (Titus 1:2).
It is I
b. 
mpossible  for God to Lie (Hebrews 6:18).


--- PAGE BREAK ---

96  The One True God
According to the above Scriptures, should we ever doubt God’s truthfulness? Should we ever 
c. 
be afraid that God might lie?
Our God is the God of Truth. Therefore it is no surprise that His works and words are 
5. 
true. What do the following Scriptures teach us about this truth?
God’s W
a. 
orks are True (Daniel 4:37).
The W
b. 
orks of  God’s Hands are True (Psalm 111:7).
The L
c. 
aw of  God is True (Psalm 119:142).
All the C
d. 
ommandments of  God are Truth (Psalm 119:151).
The S
e. 
um of  God’s Word is Truth (Psalm 119:160).
The W
f. 
ord of  God is True (John 17:17).
Our God is the God of Truth, and He has revealed His truth to men in various ways. 
6. 
According to the following Scriptures, what are the three principle means or ways 
through which God reveals truth to all men and especially to His people?
God reveals His truth through the Word of  God. What does 
a. 
II Timothy 3:16-17 teach us 
about this truth?
God reveals His truth through His Son. What do the following Scriptures teach us about 
b. 
this truth?
John 1:14, 17


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is True and Truthful  97
John 14:6
Note: This declaration is of great importance. Jesus not only taught the truth, but He is the 
Truth. He is the very essence of all truth and the fountain of all truth. In His person is found 
the greatest revelation of truth. The Scriptures testify in Ephesians 4:21 that the truth is “in 
Jesus.”
God reveals His truth through the Holy Spirit. What do the following Scriptures teach us 
c. 
about this truth?
The Holy Spirit is the S
i.
pirit of Truth (John 14:16-17; 15:26; 
16:13).
The Holy Spirit will G
ii.
uide God’s people into all the Truth 
(John 16:13).
Our God is the God of Truth and all of His ways, works, and words are within the 
7. 
realm of truth. According to the following Scriptures, how should the Christian re­
spond?
We should study the Word of  Truth. 
a. 
What does II Timothy 2:15 teach us?
We should pray for knowledge and direction in God’s truth. What do the following Scrip­
b. 
tures teach us?
Psalm 25:5


--- PAGE BREAK ---

98  The One True God
Psalm 43:3
Psalm 86:11
We should praise and thank God for His truth. What do the following Scriptures teach us?
c. 
Psalm 115:1
Psalm 138:2
We should live before God and worship God in truth. What do the following Scriptures 
d. 
teach us?
Psalm 51:6


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is True and Truthful  99
Proverbs 3:3
John 4:23-24
We should walk in God’s truth and rejoice when others do the same. What do the following 
e. 
Scriptures teach us?
Psalm 26:3
II John 1:4
III John 1:3-4


--- PAGE BREAK ---

100  The One True God
We should share God’s truth in love with others and pray that they might grow in truth. 
f. 
What do the following Scriptures teach us about this truth?
Psalm 40:10
Ephesians 4:15
II Timothy 2:25
I Timothy 2:1-4


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---

“Your lovingkindness, O LORD, extends to the heavens, 
Your faithfulness reaches to the skies.”
– Psalm 36:5 –
“For the LORD is good; His lovingkindness is everlasting 
And His faithfulness to all generations.”
– Psalm 100:5 –


--- PAGE BREAK ---

  103
Lesson Nine
God is Faithful
T
he word faithful comes from the Hebrew word aman and the Greek word pistós. 
Both words communicate the idea of certainty or stability. An appropriate 
illustration would be a strong column that holds up the weight of a building or the strong 
arms of a father that uphold and protect his helpless child. When the word faithful is used 
with regard to God, it means that He is worthy of absolute trust, and that His people can 
depend upon Him without doubt or reservation. It is important to understand that God 
is faithful, not because He does everything that His people desire, but because He does 
everything that He has promised.
In the Scriptures, the character of a person is regularly revealed through their name. 
1. 
What names are ascribed to God in the following Scriptures?
The F
a. 
aithful God (Deuteronomy 7:9).
The God of  F
b. 
aithfulness (Deuteronomy 32:4).
The H
c. 
oly One who is Faithful (Hosea 11:12).
The F
d. 
aithful Creator (I Peter 4:19).
How is God’s faithfulness described in the following Scriptures? What truths are com­
2. 
municated by each description?
Psalm 36:5


--- PAGE BREAK ---

104  The One True God
Psalm 100:5
Psalm 146:6
It is important to understand that God’s faithfulness not only depends upon His char­
3. 
acter, but also upon His power and immutability (i.e. He does not change). A God of 
limited power would be limited in His ability to fulfill His promises, and a mutable 
God could change His mind about what He has promised. What do the following 
Scriptures teach us about the power of God and His unchanging nature? Is He able to 
do all that He has promised? Will He ever change?
God is Powerful to Do All that He has Promised:
a. 
Psalm 135:5-6
Isaiah 14:24, 27
Ephesians 1:11


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Faithful  105
God and His Promises are Unchanging:
b. 
Psalm 102:25-27
Malachi 3:6
In the Scriptures are found four very important proofs of God’s faithfulness to His 
4. 
people and to all of His creation. These proofs are: (1) God’s covenants; (2) God’s 
Word; (3) God’s works; (4) The coming of God’s Son. We will consider them in that 
order below.
The Covenants of  God. 
a. 
The word covenant comes from the Latin verb convenire [com, 
together + venire, to come]. In the Scriptures, the word covenant comes from the 
Hebrew word berit (in the Old Testament) and the Greek word diathéke (in the New 
Testament). When the Bible speaks of the covenants between God and His people, 
it refers to the promises that God has made to His people—commitments that He 
has obligated Himself to fulfill without fail. According to the following Scriptures, 
how faithful has God been to the covenants He has made?
Deuteronomy 7:9
I Kings 8:23-24


--- PAGE BREAK ---

106  The One True God
Isaiah 54:10
Jeremiah 31:35-37; 33:20-21
The Word of  God. 
b. 
The Word of God is another proof of the faithfulness of God. 
Not one word of all the words that the Lord has spoken has failed. God is faith­
ful to fulfill every promise and to carry out every decree. What do the following 
Scriptures teach us with regard to this great truth?
Joshua 23:14
I Kings 8:56
Psalm 119:89-90


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Faithful  107
Isaiah 40:8
Matthew 5:18
The Works of  God. 
c. 
It is often said that one’s works verify or annul the faithfulness 
of one’s words. When we apply this proverb to God, we find that His faithfulness 
is absolutely perfect. What do the following Scriptures teach us about the absolute 
faithfulness of God as revealed through His works?
Psalm 33:4
Psalm 138:8
Isaiah 25:1


--- PAGE BREAK ---

108  The One True God
Philippians 1:6
I Thessalonians 5:23-24
The Coming of  God’s Son. 
d. 
The greatest demonstration or proof of God’s faithful­
ness is seen in the coming of His only begotten Son. From the very first chapters 
of the Scriptures, we find promises of His coming and the salvation He would 
bring. After thousands of years, all these promises were fulfilled in the person 
and work of Jesus Christ. What do the following Scriptures teach us was revealed 
about the faithfulness of God through the coming of His Son?
Luke 1:46-47; 54-55
Luke 1:68-75
Romans 15:8-9


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Faithful  109
II Corinthians 1:19-20
The faithfulness of God is revealed throughout all the Scriptures. In addition there 
5. 
has never been one instance in all of history when God was not absolutely faithful to 
every word He has spoken. In the following, we will consider the implications of such 
faithfulness. How should we live in light of the absolute fidelity of God?
We should trust in the Lord and call upon Him in prayer:
a. 
Psalm 31:14
Psalm 56:3
Psalm 62:7-8
Isaiah 26:4


--- PAGE BREAK ---

110  The One True God
We should trust in God’s wisdom and direction:
b. 
Psalm 37:5
Proverbs 3:5-6
We should believe that He will do what He has promised:
c. 
Romans 4:20-21
Hebrews 11:6
James 1:6-8


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Faithful  111
We should proclaim His faithfulness to all:
d. 
Psalm 40:10
Psalm 89:1
The Scriptures frequently contrast the wisdom of trusting in God with the foolishness 
6. 
of trusting in self. Read Jeremiah 17:5-8 until you are familiar with its contents and 
then describe the difference between the man who trusts in his own power and wis­
dom, and the man who trusts in the faithfulness of God.
The man who trusts in himself  (v. 5-6):
a. 
The man who trusts in God (v.7-8):
b. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

“The one who does not love does not know God, for God is 
love. By this the love of God was manifested in us, that God 
has sent His only begotten Son into the world so that 
we might live through Him. In this is love, not that we 
loved God, but that He loved us and sent His Son to be the 
propitiation for our sins.”
– 1 John 4:8-10 –


--- PAGE BREAK ---

  113
Lesson Ten
God is Love
Love: A Divine Attribute
W
hat is the love of God? It is that divine attribute that moves Him to freely and 
selflessly give Himself to others for their benefit or good. The Scriptures teach 
us that divine love (i.e. God’s love) is much more than an attitude, an emotion, or a work. 
It is an attribute of God—a part of His very being or nature. God not only loves, but He 
is love. He is the very essence of what true love is and all true love flows from Him as its 
ultimate source. 
1. What is the name ascribed to God in 
1. 
II Corinthians 13:11? What does this name 
tell us about God’s nature?
The G
a. 
od of  Love
Note: God is love itself and the source of all true love everywhere.
In 
2. 
I John 4:8 and 4:16 is found one of the most important declarations in all of the 
Scriptures with regard to the character and nature of God. What is that declaration 
and what does it communicate to us about God?


--- PAGE BREAK ---

114  The One True God
Note: It is important to recognize that the Scriptures declare that, “God is Love,” and not, 
“Love is God.” The two phrases are not interchangeable. The universe was not created and 
is not ruled by a sentiment, emotion, or attitude called ‘love,’ but by the sovereign Lord of 
Scripture who, in His very nature, is love.
The Many Demonstrations of God’s Love
I
t would be easier to count all the stars in the heavens or each grain of sand on the 
earth, than to measure or even seek to describe the love of God. Its height, depth, 
breadth and width are beyond the comprehension of the greatest and most discerning 
creatures. Although we will never be able to fully comprehend God’s love or measure its 
contents, we can seek to grow in our understanding of it through considering its many 
demonstrations in the Scriptures.
God’s Benevolence Toward All Creatures
The word benevolence can be defined as the disposition to seek the ‘good’ of others, 
to bless them and to promote their welfare. It is the constant testimony of the Scriptures 
that God is a loving and benevolent Creator; He seeks the blessing and benefit of all His 
creatures, both the evil and the good. He is the ‘absolute opposite’ of any opinion that 
would portray Him as a capricious or vindictive deity who seeks the downfall and misery 
of His creation.
What do the following Scriptures teach us with regard to God’s benevolence to all His 
1. 
creation?
Psalm 145:9, 15-16
Matthew 5:44-45


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Love  115
Acts 14:16-17
According to the following Scriptures, how should all creation respond to the benevo­
2. 
lence of God?
Psalm 147:7-9
Psalm 150:6
According to 
3. 
Romans 1:21-23, how has mankind in general responded to God’s be­
nevolence toward them?
God’s Mercy, Grace, and Patience 
towards Sinful Humanity
Three of the most beautiful and dearly loved ideas found in the Scriptures are the 
mercy, grace, and patience of God. In these ‘three jewels’, the love of God is truly mani­
fested. The word mercy refers to the lovingkindness, tenderheartedness, and compassion 
of God towards even the most miserable and pitiful of His creatures. The word grace 
refers to God’s willingness to treat His creatures, not according to their own merit or 
worth, but according to His own kindness and generosity. The words patience and longsuf­
fering refer to God’s willingness to bear with or suffer long with the weakness and wrong­
doing of His creatures.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

116  The One True God
In 
1. 
Exodus 34:6, we find one of the most important self-descriptions of God in all the 
Scriptures. What does this verse teach us about the ‘three jewels’ of God’s character 
that were mentioned above? 
Note: The word compassionate may be translated merciful. The phrase slow to anger may be 
translated patient or longsuffering.
God’s Mercy
The word mercy refers to the lovingkindness, tenderheartedness, and compassion of 
God towards even the most miserable and pitiful of His creatures. In God’s mercy is 
found a great manifestation of His love. In many of the Scriptures given below, the idea 
of mercy is communicated through the words compassion and lovingkindness.
How is God described in the following texts?
1. 
The L
a. 
ord is Merciful (Psalm 145:8).
The F
b. 
ather of  Mercies (II Corinthians 1:3).
The God who is R
c. 
ich in Mercy (Ephesians 2:4).
The Lord is F
d. 
ull of  compassion and is Merciful (James 5:11).
How is God’s mercy described in 
2. 
Psalm 57:10? What does this description mean? 
Write your explanation.
God’s L
a. 
ovingkindness (also translated “mercy”) is great to the 
Heavens.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Love  117
According to 
3. 
Luke 6:35-36, how is God’s mercy revealed to all men?
According to the following Scriptures, how is God’s mercy (lovingkindness and com­
4. 
passion) revealed to His people?
Psalm 86:5
Psalm 103:10-14
Lamentations 3:22-23
According to the following Scriptures, how should we respond to God’s mercy?
5. 
Hebrews 4:16


--- PAGE BREAK ---

118  The One True God
Jude 1:21-22
Luke 6:35-36
God’s Grace
The word grace denotes unmerited favor and refers to God’s willingness to treat His 
creatures, not according to their own merit or worth, but according to His own abundant 
kindness and overflowing generosity. In God’s grace is found a great manifestation of 
His love.
How is God described in the following texts?
1. 
The Lord is G
a. 
racious (Psalm 145:8).
The God of  A
b. 
ll Grace (I Peter 5:10).
According to 
2. 
Isaiah 30:18, what is God’s attitude toward all men and especially 
toward His people?
According to 
3. 
John 1:14, 16-17, what, or who, is the greatest manifestation of the 
grace (i.e. unmerited favor) of God? Explain your answer.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Love  119
According to the following Scriptures, what is the relationship between God’s grace 
4. 
and the salvation of sinful men? Are we saved through our own merits or through the 
grace of God?
Ephesians 2:8-9
II Timothy 1:9
According to 
5. 
Ephesians 1:6 and 2:7, what is God’s great and eternal purpose in sav­
ing sinful men?
God has saved us to the P
a. 
raise of  His glorious Grace (Ephesians 1:6).
God has saved us so that throughout all of  eternity He might S
b. 
how the surpassing 
Riches of  His Grace in His kindness towards His people (Ephesians 2:7).
According to the following Scriptures, how should we respond to the grace of God 
6. 
revealed through Jesus Christ and the Gospel?
Acts 20:24
Romans 6:1-2


--- PAGE BREAK ---

120  The One True God
Philippians 4:13; II Timothy 2:1
Titus 2:11-13
Hebrews 4:16
I Peter 5:5
II Peter 3:18


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Love  121
God’s Patience
The words patience and longsuffering refer to God’s willingness to “bear with” or “suf­
fer long” with the weakness and wrongdoing of His creatures. In God’s patience is found 
a great manifestation of His love, especially in light of the sinfulness of mankind.
 One of the most important and precious truths about God is found in 
1. 
Exodus 34:6. 
What is this truth and what does it mean? Explain your answer.
The Lord is S
a. 
low to Anger.
Note: This declaration is also found in: Numbers 14:18; Nehemiah 9:17; Psalm 86:15; 103:8; 
145:8; Joel 2:13; Jonah 4:2; Nahum 1:3. The frequency with which this description of God 
occurs in the Scripture demonstrates both its importance and truthfulness.
According to
2. 
 I Peter 3:20, why did God delay so long before judging the world in 
the days of Noah? What attribute of God caused Him to hold back His hand of judg­
ment? What does this teach us about God’s nature?
The patience or longsuffering of God is especially manifested in the kindness He 
3. 
showed the nation of Israel. According to Psalm 78:36-40, how did God respond 
to Israel’s almost constant rebellion? What does God’s response teach us about His 
patience or longsuffering?


--- PAGE BREAK ---

122  The One True God
What is the foundation or motivation of God’s patience towards even the greatest of 
4. 
sinners? What do the following Scriptures teach us? Why is God so patient, so willing 
to bear with disobedient and ungrateful humanity?
Ezekiel 18:23, 32
I Timothy 2:4
II Peter 3:9
In 
5. 
Numbers 14:18 is found one of the most important texts with regard to the pa­
tience or longsuffering of God. It teaches us that, although God is longsuffering, He 
is also just and will ultimately judge the wicked after every offer of pardon has been 
rejected. Fill in the blanks and complete the phrase:
God’s Patience: 
a. 
The LORD is Slow to Anger and abundant in loving­
kindness, forgiving iniquity and transgression. This truth teaches us that God is 
very patient, even with the most wayward sinner and hardened rebel.
God’s Justice: 
b. 
He will by no means Clear the Guilty, visiting the in­
iquity of the fathers on the children to the third and the fourth generations. This 
truth teaches us that while God is patient and disposed to suffer long those who reb­
el against Him; nevertheless, the sinner who refuses to repent will ultimately suffer 
the consequences of his sin. This truth is also clearly demonstrated in many other 
Scriptures. For example, in Nahum 1:3 we read, “The LORD is slow to anger and 
great in power, and the LORD will by no means leave the guilty unpunished.”


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Love  123
According to 
6. 
Romans 2:4, how should we respond to God’s patience and longsuffer­
ing towards our sin? What should the sinner do in light of God’s kindness?
God’s Giving of His Son for 
the Salvation of His People
We have learned that God’s love is beyond comprehension, and that it is manifested 
to all of His creatures in an almost infinite number of ways. Nevertheless, the Scriptures 
teach us that there is one manifestation of the love of God that rises above them all—
God giving His only Son for the salvation of His people!
In 
1. 
I John 4:8-10 is found one of the most important passages in all of Scripture about 
the love of God and its greatest manifestation to men. Read the text several times until 
you are familiar with its contents and then answer the following questions:
What does verse 8 teach us about the very character or nature of  God?
a. 
According to verse 9, what is the greatest manifestation of  the love of  God towards His 
b. 
people?
According to verse 10, was God’s love a response to our love for Him? Yes or No? Explain 
c. 
your answer.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

124  The One True God
We have learned from I John 4:8-10 that God’s sending of His Son to die for the sins 
2. 
of His people is the greatest demonstration of unmerited and unconditional love. 
What do the following Scriptures teach us about this truth? Why did God send His 
Son to die for our sins and save us from judgment?
John 3:16-17
Romans 5:6-8
If God loved us so much that He gave His Son to die for us, even when we were “en­
3. 
emies” in His sight, what will this love cause Him to do for us now that we are His 
children? What do the following Scriptures teach us?
Romans 5:8-10
Romans 8:32


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---

“In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth.”
– Genesis 1:1 –
“For from Him and through Him and to Him are all things. 
To Him be the glory forever. Amen.”
– Romans 11:36 –


--- PAGE BREAK ---

  127
Lesson Eleven
God is Creator 
and Sustainer
God the Creator
O
ne of the foundational truths of Scripture and the Christian faith is that God is 
the Creator of the heavens and the earth. He is before all things, and all things 
exist because of Him. He was neither caused nor made by something or someone greater 
than Himself. He is the Cause and Maker of all things, and nothing that does exist would 
exist apart from Him. He alone is Creator and no one shares this title with Him.
The belief that God created all beings in heaven and on earth should radically affect 
1. 
every aspect of one’s life. 
It should lead to awe and reverence. 
a. 
The knowledge that there is a God so great that 
He has created innumerable worlds and beings and sustains them effortlessly is be­
yond comprehension. Such a God is worthy of absolute reverence. If at times we 
stand in awe of His creation, how much more should we stand in awe of Him? 
It should lead to thanksgiving and worship. 
b. 
If God had not created us we would not 
be. To refuse Him thanksgiving and praise is to be guilty of the greatest arrogance 
and ingratitude. 
It should lead to humility. 
c. 
What is man that God should take thought of Him? We 
exist because He made us and apart from Him we are nothing. A lack of humility 
before God is beyond comprehension. 
It should give purpose to our existence. 
d. 
We are not the result of random chance or 
some mindless process of naturalistic evolution. We were made according to 
God’s design and for His purpose and good pleasure.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

128  The One True God
In the Scriptures, a person’s name has great significance, often describing and reveal­
2. 
ing something about their character. What is the name given to God in Isaiah 40:28? 
What does it teach us about His greatness and His relationship to His creation—
especially to mankind?
In the following verses are some of the most important statements in the Scriptures 
3. 
with regard to God as Creator. Consider carefully each verse, and identify the truths 
that are being communicated. What do they teach us about God? What do they teach 
us about man’s dependence and indebtedness to God?
Genesis 1:1-2
Nehemiah 9:6
Jeremiah 10:12
John 1:2-3


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Creator and Sustainer  129
Note: It is important to note that both John 1:3 above and Colossians 1:16 below are speak­
ing about the Son of God. God the Father created all things through God the Son (Colos­
sians 1:16).
Colossians 1:16
Note: It is important to note that all things were not only created through the Son of God, but 
also for Him—for His honor and good pleasure.
Hebrews 3:4
Note: It would be absurd to think that the house one lives in simply came into being. The 
existence of a house implies a builder with intelligence. How much more does this complex 
universe imply a personal and intelligent Creator?
Hebrews 11:3
Note: Theologians often use a Latin phrase to describe God’s work of creation: creatio ex 
nihilo—creation out of nothing. God did not use already existing materials to make the uni­
verse, but created it out of nothing, by His own power and for His own glory.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

130  The One True God
God the Sustainer of All
T
he Scriptures teach us that God is not only the Creator of the heavens and the 
earth, but He is also their Sustainer. Nothing that exists would exist apart from 
Him. If He were to turn away from His creation for even a moment, all would perish. 
We owe our every breath and movement to Him. Every being, from the highest angel to 
the lowest worm, lives in absolute dependence upon God. Both the man who bows in 
humble worship and he who clenches his fist in defiance of God have this in common—
they live and breathe and move by His gracious, sustaining power. They exist because 
He made them and they breathe because He gives them breath. If He turned away from 
them, they would turn to dust.
In 
1. 
I Timothy 6:13 is found a very brief and yet powerful declaration about God and 
creation’s dependence upon Him. What does it teach us about God’s power and cre­
ation’s absolute dependence upon Him? Complete the declaration and then explain 
its meaning:
God gives L
a. 
ife to all Things.
The Scriptures not only teach us that God created the universe, but that He also faith­
2. 
fully sustains it by His power. Without God, the universe would never have been 
brought into existence, and without His continued care, the universe and every living 
thing would cease. All things that are, exist in absolute dependence upon Him. What 
do the following Scriptures teach us about this great truth?
Job 12:10
Job 34:14-15


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Creator and Sustainer  131
Psalm 104:27-30
Colossians 1:17
Note: It is again important to note that both Colossians 1:17 above and Hebrews 1:3 below 
are speaking about the Son of God. He is not only the Creator of all things, but the Sustainer 
of all He has created.
Hebrews 1:3
In 
3. 
Acts 17:22-31 is recorded the Apostle Paul’s sermon to the Epicurean and Stoic 
philosophers on Mars Hill. The passage contains one of the greatest discourses on 
God as both Creator and Sustainer of the universe. According to the following verses, 
complete and explain the meaning of the four great declarations that are made about 
God, and about man’s absolute dependence upon Him.
He is the God who made the W
a. 
orld and all Things in it (v.24).


--- PAGE BREAK ---

132  The One True God
He is the Lord of  H
b. 
eaven and Earth (v.24).
He Himself  gives to all people L
c. 
ife and Breath and All Things 
(v.25).
In Him we L
d. 
ive, Move and Exist (v.28).
God the Owner of All
G
od is the Creator and Sustainer of all things in heaven and on earth. Therefore 
it is not wrong that He claims all things as His own. One of the ‘first truths’ that 
must be comprehended if we are to have a right understanding of God and our place in 
His creation is that we are not our own. We were not made for ourselves. We belong to the 
One who made us and are responsible before Him to live according to His will and for 
His glory and good pleasure. 
In the Scriptures, a name has great significance because it often describes who a per­
1. 
son is and reveals something about one’s character. What is the name given to God in 
Genesis 14:19, 22 and what truth does it communicate to us about Him?


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Creator and Sustainer  133
In the following are some of the most important statements in the Scriptures with 
2. 
regard to God’s ownership of His creation. Consider carefully each verse, and then 
identify the truths that are being communicated. How do they demonstrate God’s 
claim upon creation, and especially upon mankind?
Deuteronomy 10:14
Job 41:11
Psalm 24:1-2; 50:10-12; 89:11
The Purpose of Creation
W
e have learned from the Scriptures that God is the Creator, Sustainer, and 
Rightful Owner of His creation. It now follows that we should consider the 
purpose for which He created all things. If God was under no obligation to create the 
universe, and if He did not need the universe to fill some void in His existence, then what 
was and is the divine purpose behind the creation and existence of man? The Scriptures 
boldly and unapologetically declare that it is the glory and good pleasure of  God.
The God of All Fullness
One of the most awe-inspiring and humbling truths about God is that He is ab­
solutely free from any need or dependence. His existence, the fulfillment of His will, 
and His happiness or good pleasure does not depend upon anyone or anything outside 
of Himself. He is the only being who is truly self-existent, self-sustaining, self-sufficient, 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

134  The One True God
in‑dependent, and free. All other beings derive their life and blessedness from God, but 
all that is necessary for God’s existence and perfect happiness is found in Himself. To 
even suggest that God made man because He was lonely or incomplete is absurd and 
even blasphemous. Creation is not the result of some lack in God, but the result of His 
fullness, or the overflow of His abundance.
What do the following Scriptures teach us about the 
1. 
self-existence and self-
sufficiency of God? From where does God’s life or existence come? Is He dependent 
upon another?
Psalm 36:9
John 5:26
Note: God has life in Himself and is the fountain of life for all living creatures. He is not 
dependent upon another, but all things are dependent upon Him. 
The 
2. 
self-sufficiency of God is a declaration of His infinite greatness and His exalted 
place above His creation. All things depend upon Him for their very existence and yet 
He Himself depends upon no one. Acts 17:22-31, records the Apostle Paul’s sermon 
to the Epicurean and Stoic philosophers on Mars Hill. In verses 24-25, he refutes their 
idolatrous views by making three very important declarations about the one true God. 
What do these declarations teach us about God’s self-sufficiency and His relationship 
to His creation?
God does not dwell in temples made with hands (v.24).
a. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Creator and Sustainer  135
God is not served by human hands (v.25).
b. 
God does not need anything (v.25).
c. 
The Glory of God
If God did not create the universe because of some need, then what was His purpose? 
Why did God create all things? The Scriptures teach us that God created everything for 
His good pleasure and glory (i.e. to manifest His greatness and receive from us the honor 
and worship that is due Him). This may sound strange, even a bit self-centered and selfish 
on God’s part, but nothing could be further from the truth. First, God is worthy to take 
the highest place above His creation and He is worthy to be the object of all our thoughts, 
activities, and worship. For Him to deny to Himself the ‘first place’ above His entire cre­
ation would be to deny that He is God. Second, the greatest good God could ever do for 
us, and the greatest kindness He could ever show us, would be to direct all things in such 
a way that His greatness might be fully displayed before us. If God is of infinite worth, 
beauty, and majesty, then the most valuable, beautiful, and majestic gift He could ever 
give us would be to show us His own glory.
God is the Creator, Sustainer and Rightful Owner of the heavens and the earth and 
1. 
all that dwells within them. All things were created by Him, belong to Him, and exist for His 
glory. What does Romans 11:36 teach us about this truth? Complete each statement.
F
a.  rom Him are all things. God is the Source of all things and the fountain of all 
life (Psalm 36:9). Creation owes its very existence to God, and apart from Him 
there would be nothing. Man is not the product of some mindless evolutionary 
process that he should live without purpose; nor is he the source of his own ex­
istence that he should live for himself; but he is the work of  God that he should live
for His glory.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

136  The One True God
T
b.  hrough Him are all things. God is the Agent through which all things 
were created and are sustained. If God were to turn away from His creation for 
one moment, all would become chaos. But through His unhindered sovereignty, un­
searchable wisdom, and infinite power, He sustains all things and directs them 
(molecules and men alike) to the great end for which they were created—the glory 
of God.
T
c.  o Him are all things. In this simple phrase is found the meaning of existence. 
God created all things, and works in all things for His good pleasure and glory—
in order to manifest His greatness and receive from us the honor and worship that 
are due to Him.
T
d.  o Him be the Glory forever. Amen. The only proper response to the 
greatness of God is to esteem Him above all things and to give to Him the highest 
honor, adoration, and praise. In the study of theology there is an important Latin 
phrase used to describe this truth—Soli Deo Gloria, which translates, To God Alone 
be the Glory.
Colossians 1:16
2. 
 is very similar to Romans 11:36, but it speaks specifically about the 
Son of God. What does this text teach us about the purpose of creation?
All things have been created B
a. 
y Him and Through Him. The Father is the 
source of all things (Romans 11:36), but He has created all things through the Son 
(John 1:3; Hebrews 1:2), who is the Mediator between the Father and creation. 
Through the Son, the Father created all things, reveals Himself to His creation (John 
1:18), reconciled the creation to Himself (II Corinthians 5:19), rules creation (Phi­
lippians 2:9-11), and will one day judge creation (John 5:22).
All things have been created F
b. 
OR Him. It is no contradiction to say that all things 
have been created for the glory and good pleasure of both the Father and the Son. 
According to the Scriptures, the Father loves the Son and has given all things into 
His hand (John 3:35); it is the Father’s will that all honor the Son as they honor 
Him (John 5:23). Therefore everything said in Romans 11:36 about the purpose of 
creation may also be applied to the Son. All creation, in all realms, has one great 
and final purpose—the glory of God. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Creator and Sustainer  137
Our Response to God the Creator
Reverence & Humility
Our first response to God as Creator should be one of reverence and humility. We 
reverence God to the degree that we acknowledge His highest place before us as Creator 
and Lord of all that exists, regarding Him with the utmost respect and awe. We humble 
ourselves to the degree that we acknowledge our place before Him as creatures; that we 
are His possession, created for His glory and good pleasure. When the creation is cor­
rectly understood, it works to lay all men prostrate before God with reverence, trembling, 
and a real sense of utter dependence upon the One who made them.
In light of the awesome power and grandeur of God, mankind’s first response should 
1. 
be that of reverence and awe. Read Psalm 33:6-9. According to verse 8, how should 
the inhabitants of earth respond to the infinite power and wisdom of God revealed 
through creation? 
Awe and reverence are inseparable from humility. If we have truly comprehended 
2. 
something of the infinite perfections and power of God, we will humble ourselves 
before Him. Read Psalm 8:1-4. According to verse 4, how did the psalmist’s contem­
plation of God’s creation produce in him an attitude of great humility? How should 
this attitude also be reflected in the life of every man?
Worship & Adoration
How can the creature not worship its Creator and Sustainer? The debt that is owed 
Him cannot be measured. Would there be anything if He had not spoken? Would not all 
things immediately turn to chaos and destruction if He did not sustain them? Could the 
constellations and planets find their way through the skies without Him? Would not the 
seas escape their boundaries and engulf the land if His hand did not hold them back? 
Could man draw even one more breath were it not granted to him by God? How then 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

138  The One True God
can we not worship? It would not be wrong to say that the primary purpose of creation 
and especially of man is to worship the God who created us and by whose power and 
faithfulness we are sustained. The worship of God is our highest privilege and greatest 
responsibility. When we do worship Him, we are at last fulfilling the purpose for which 
we were created.
According to 
1. 
Revelation 4:11, why is God worthy to be praised?
In 
2. 
Psalm 148:1-13 is found a call for every creature of every realm to render worship, 
honor, and glory to the God who made them. Read the text until you are familiar with 
its contents and then complete the following exercises:
Identify the different creatures and realms of  creation that are called to offer worship to 
a. 
God:
According to verses 5-6, what is the reason given for offering praise to God?
b. 
According to verse 13, what is the reason given for offering praise to God?
c. 
We will conclude our study of God as Creator and Sustainer with two commands that 
3. 
authoritatively reach to every realm and every inhabitant of creation. For each pas­


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Creator and Sustainer  139
sage answer the following questions. What is commanded? What is the significance 
of each command for mankind?
Psalm 103:22
Note: How can a man bless God? We do not have any power to give to Him any blessing that 
is not already His. To bless God is simply to acknowledge in our hearts His greatness and to 
confess His greatness in praise.
Psalm 150:6


--- PAGE BREAK ---

“But at the end of that period, I, Nebuchadnezzar, raised 
my eyes toward heaven and my reason returned to me, and 
I blessed the Most High and praised and honored Him who 
lives forever; for His dominion is an everlasting dominion, 
and His kingdom endures from generation to generation. 
All the inhabitants of the earth are accounted as nothing, 
but He does according to His will in the host of heaven 
and among the inhabitants of earth; and no one can ward 
off His hand or say to Him, ‘What have You done?’”
– Daniel 4:34-35 –
“Now to the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only God, 
be honor and glory forever and ever. Amen.”
– I Timothy 1:17 –


--- PAGE BREAK ---

  141
Lesson Twelve
God is Lord 
Over All
T
he Scriptures not only teach us that God is the Creator and Sustainer of the uni­
verse, but also that He is its Sovereign Lord and King. He rules over all creatures, 
actions, and things, from the greatest to the smallest, by His perfect wisdom, infinite 
power, and absolute righteousness. He is free to do all things according to His own will, 
and to do them for His own glory and good pleasure. What He has determined, no power 
in heaven or on earth can annul.
The Supremacy of God
B
efore we begin upon our study of sovereignty, we must first consider a doctrine 
that is absolutely essential to a correct understanding of God—His Supremacy. 
The word supreme refers to that which is highest in excellence, rank, or authority. The 
Supremacy of God refers to His exalted place above all creation.
The truth of God’s supremacy has many important implications. With regard to 
God’s Person, it means that He is infinitely more excellent than any of His creatures and 
of infinitely greater worth than all of His creation combined. With regard to God’s Place 
(or Rank), it means that He is exalted above all creation and has no equals. With regard 
to God’s Purpose, it means that He is at the very center of all things and that He directs all 
things towards one great goal—His own glory.
In the Scriptures, a person’s name has great significance, often describing who he is 
1. 
and revealing something about his character. What are the names or titles ascribed to 
God in the following Scriptures? What do they reveal to us about His supremacy, His 
relationship to His creation, and especially to man?


--- PAGE BREAK ---

142  The One True God
The Lord M
a. 
ost High over all the Earth (Psalm 97:9).
The H
b. 
igh and Exalted One (Isaiah 57:15).
Having considered the divine names that reveal God’s supremacy, we will now con­
2. 
sider one of the most beautiful declarations of the supremacy of God in the Scriptures. 
Read I Chronicles 29:11 until you are familiar with its contents and then answer the 
following questions:
What are the six attributes and rights that are ascribed to God?
a. 
G	
i.
oooooo.
P	
ii.
oooooo.
G	
iii.
oooooo.
V	
iv.
oooooo.
M	
v.
oooooo.
D	
vi.
oooooo.
How do these six attributes demonstrate God’s supremacy over all?
b. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Lord Over All  143
Having declared the greatness and supremacy of  God over all things,
c. 
 I Chronicles 29:11 
concludes with a very important statement about God. What does God do for Himself ? 
How does this demonstrate His rightful supremacy over all things?
God E
i.
xalts Himself as Head over All.
To conclude our study on the supremacy of God, we will consider two very impor­
3. 
tant Scriptures from the book of Psalms. What do they teach us about God’s absolute 
supremacy over all creation?
Psalm 97:9
Psalm 113:4-6
Note: In verse 6, we read, “Who humbles Himself to behold the things that are in heaven and 
in the earth?” This is one of the most majestic verses in all of Scripture. It means that God is 
so glorious, so excellent, and so beautiful that He must condescend (i.e. humble Himself) to 
turn His eyes away from His own beauty and look at any other being or thing. All the beauty 
of heaven and earth combined is nothing compared to the glory of God Himself!


--- PAGE BREAK ---

144  The One True God
The Titles of God’s Sovereignty
I
n the thought and language of the Scriptures, a name can have great significance 
and communicate many important truths about the one who bears it. In the Scrip­
tures are found numerous names and titles that communicate important truths about 
God’s attributes and works. Through the study of these names we can come to know 
Him in a greater and more profound way. In the following, we will consider the most im­
portant names and titles that demonstrate God’s absolute sovereignty over all creation:
Lord
The English title that is most often employed in the Scriptures to communicate God’s 
sovereignty is Lord. The title describes someone who has supremacy and authority over 
another. When applied to God, it refers to His absolute sovereignty over all creation. It 
is important to recognize that the title Lord not only communicates truth about God, but 
also defines man’s relationship to Him. If God is Lord, then all creation (especially man) 
is His subject.
What names or titles are attributed to God in the following Scriptures? What do they 
1. 
communicate to us about His Lordship?
God is the Lord of  H
a. 
eaven and Earth (Acts 17:24).
God is the Lord of  L
b. 
ords (I Timothy 6:15).
King
Closely related to the title of Lord is that of King. There is probably no other title 
in the English language that has as much power to communicate not only the ideas of 
sovereignty and power, but also of royalty, nobility, and majesty. In the Scriptures, God 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Lord Over All  145
is the great King over all creation and reigns with unsurpassed glory. His throne is in 
heaven, the earth is His footstool, and His kingdom endures forever.
What names are attributed to God in the following Scriptures? What do they com­
1. 
municate to us about His sovereign rule as King?
The G
a. 
reat King over all the Earth (Psalm 47:2, 7; Malachi 1:14).
The King of  H
b. 
eaven (Daniel 4:37).
The K
c. 
ing of  Kings (I Timothy 6:15; Revelation 17:14; 19:16).
The G
d. 
reat King above all Gods (Psalm 95:3).
Note: This Scripture is not teaching that there is more than one God or that the one true God 
competes for first place with other gods. It means that God is far above all the false gods that 
have ever been conceived of in the hearts and minds of fallen men.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

146  The One True God
The King E
e. 
ternal, Immortal, Invisible, the Only 
God (I Timothy 1:17).
Sovereign, Ruler, & Master
The three divine titles Sovereign, Ruler, and Master clearly communicate the absolute 
authority of God over His creation. The title sovereign comes from the Latin prefix super 
that means, over or above. It refers to one who rules over others with authority. The title 
ruler is derived from the Latin verb regere that means, to lead straight or guide. It refers 
to one who sets the standard and marks out the path with authority. The title master is 
derived from the Latin term magnus that means, great or large. It refers to one who has 
control or mastery over something, such as a teacher who has mastered a certain area of 
study, an owner who has control over his slaves, or a ruler who reigns over his subjects. 
In the following Scriptures, we will learn that God is the only true Sovereign, Ruler, and 
Master over all creation. 
In the Scriptures, a name has great significance and communicates something about 
1. 
the person who bears it. What names are attributed to God in the following Scrip­
tures? What do they communicate to us about His sovereignty?
The B
a. 
lessed and Only Soverign (I Timothy 6:15).
The R
b. 
uler over the Realm of  mankind (Daniel 4:17).


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Lord Over All  147
Our O
c. 
nly Master and Lord (Jude 4; II Timothy 2:21; II Peter 2:1).
The Extension of God’s Sovereignty
I
t is often asked, “What are the limits of God’s rule? Is there any creature or activity 
that is not under His government?” The Scripture’s answer is clear—every living 
being, every created thing, and all the events of history are under the sovereign govern­
ment of God. He rules over all things; no one, including man, is beyond the boundaries 
of His rule. As Creator and Sustainer, He has the exclusive and unchallenged right to 
govern all realms and all creatures according to His will and good pleasure. All that He 
desires, He does, and there is no power in heaven, earth, or hell that can alter or hinder 
what He has determined.
The following are some of the most important declarations in the Scriptures with 
1. 
regard to the absolute sovereignty of God. Consider carefully each verse, and then 
identify the truths that are being communicated. What do they teach us about the 
extension of God’s sovereignty?
Psalm 33:11
Psalm 103:19


--- PAGE BREAK ---

148  The One True God
Psalm 115:3
Psalm 135:6
Isaiah 46:9-10
Ephesians 1:11
The truth that God does whatever He pleases in every realm of creation is not only a 
2. 
testimony to His sovereignty, but to His omnipotence. He is all-powerful and therefore 
there is no creature or power that can successfully oppose Him. What do the following 
Scriptures teach us about this truth?
II Chronicles 20:6
Job 23:13


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Lord Over All  149
Proverbs 21:30
In 
3. 
Daniel 4:34-35 is found one of the greatest declarations in all the Scripture with 
regard to the sovereignty of God over His creation. Summarize each of the following 
phrases and explain what it teaches us about the sovereignty of God:
His dominion is an everlasting dominion. His kingdom endures from generation to genera­
a. 
tion (v.34):
All the inhabitants of  the earth are accounted as nothing (v.35):
b. 
He does according to His will in the host of  heaven and among the inhabitants of  the earth 
c. 
(v.35):


--- PAGE BREAK ---

150  The One True God
No one can ward off  His hand (v.35):
d. 
No one can say to Him, “What have you done?” 
e. 
(v.35):
Our Response to God’s Sovereignty
G
od is creation’s Sovereign Lord and King. He rules over all creatures, actions, 
and things, from the greatest to the smallest. He is free to do all things accord­
ing to His own will, and to do them for His own glory and good pleasure. What He has 
determined, no power in heaven or on earth can hinder. What should be man’s response 
to such a God? The Scriptures are clear—reverence and worship. When the sovereignty or 
lordship of God is correctly understood, it works to lay all men prostrate before Him and 
to acknowledge that He alone is worthy of creation’s reverence, obedience, adoration, 
and praise.
Reverence & Obedience
Man’s first response to the sovereignty of God should be that of reverence and obedi­
ence. To revere God is to acknowledge His highest place before us as Lord and regard 
Him with the utmost respect and awe. Such an attitude of reverence will always result in 
obedience. Sovereignty implies a relationship of one exercising authority over another. 
If we truly acknowledge God’s sovereignty, then we will place ourselves before Him in 
reverent submission to His will.
What do the following Scriptures teach us about the great and sincere reverence that 
1. 
is due God as the Lord and only Sovereign of creation?
Psalm 47:2


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Lord Over All  151
Jeremiah 10:7
Daniel 6:26
Having considered the reverence that is due the King of kings and Lord of lords, we 
2. 
will now consider the obedience that must follow all true reverence. What do the fol­
lowing Scriptures teach us about the allegiance and obedience that is due God as the 
Lord and only Sovereign of creation?
Psalm 66:7
Isaiah 45:23
Adoration & Praise
If men think it proper to give homage and honor to the kings and rulers of the earth, 
whose lives are mortal and whose kingdoms are frail and temporary, how much more 
should mankind honor the Eternal King whose kingdom endures forever! Although there 
are many kings and lords, God alone bears the title King of  kings and Lord of  lords. He 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

152  The One True God
alone is supreme over all creation, ruling with absolute and unhindered sovereignty. The 
inhabitants of the earth are like grasshoppers before Him. The nations are like a drop 
from a bucket and regarded as a speck of dust on the scales. He reduces rulers to nothing 
and makes void the decisions of the most powerful among angels and men. There is no 
wisdom and no understanding and no counsel against Him. He does all things according 
to the counsel of His own perfect will, and no creature in heaven or on earth can restrain 
His hand or say to Him, “What have you done?” He should therefore be the focus of all 
worship and adoration.
In 
1. 
Psalm 99:1-5 is found one of the most majestic declarations in the Old Testament 
about the reverence and worship that is due God as Sovereign and King. Read the text 
until you are familiar with its contents and then answer the following questions:
How is God described in the following verses? What does this description of  God communi­
a. 
cate to us about His sovereign rule over creation? Complete the following declarations:
He R
i.
eigns (v.1).
He is E
ii.
nthroned above the Cherubim (v.1).
He is G
iii.
reat (v.2).
He is E
iv.
xalted above all the peoples (v.2).
His Name is G
v.
reat and Awesome (v.3).
He is H
vi.
oly (v.3).
According to verse four, how is God’s reign described? What are the characteristics of  His 
b. 
sovereign rule over creation? Complete the following declarations:
The love of J
i.
ustice.
The establishment of E
ii.
Ouity.
The execution of J
iii.
ustice and Righteousness.
According to the following verses from this Scripture, how should men respond to what God 
c. 
has revealed about Himself  and His sovereign rule over His creation?
Verse 1:
i.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Lord Over All  153
Verse 3:
ii.
Verse 5:
iii.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

“But the LORD abides forever; He has established His 
throne for judgment, and He will judge the world 
in righteousness; He will execute judgment for the 
peoples with equity.”
– Psalm 9:7-8 –
“And inasmuch as it is appointed for men to die once and 
after this comes judgment…”
– Hebrews 9:27 –


--- PAGE BREAK ---

  155
Lesson Thirteen
God is Lawgiver 
and Judge
H
aving considered God as Lord, we will now consider His place over creation 
as Lawgiver and Judge. The Scriptures teach us that God is a holy, righteous, 
and loving Sovereign who cares for the well-being of His creation. It is right that such a 
Sovereign should rule over His creation and administer justice, rewarding the good that 
is done and punishing the evil. According to the Scriptures, God has revealed His will to 
all men and will judge all men according to the standard that has been revealed to them. 
All creatures can be assured that God will judge them according to the strictest standards 
of justice and fairness. It must always be recognized that God’s judgment of man is not 
unwarranted or cruel, but an inevitable consequence of His holy and righteous character 
and a necessary part of His government. A God who would forego judging wickedness 
would not be good or righteous. A creation where wickedness was not restrained and 
judged would soon self-destruct.
God as Lawgiver
T
he Scriptures teach us that the Creator and Sovereign Lord of the universe is also 
its supreme Lawgiver and Judge. God has established the moral laws by which 
all men must live and He also holds them accountable for their obedience and disobedi­
ence. According to the Scriptures, man was not created to be autonomous [Greek: auto, 
self + nomos, law], or self-governed, but theonomos [theos, God + nomos, law] or under 
God’s law.
As Lawgiver and Judge, God is both holy and righteous. The holiness of God refers 
to His separation from all that is common, profane, or sinful. The righteousness of God 
refers to the rightness and fairness of all His works and judgments. These attributes guar­
antee that God’s law will always be appropriate and right, and that His judgments will 
always be perfect and impartial. He will always do the right thing. On that great day of 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

156  The One True God
His judgment, when all men stand before Him, they can be assured that He will judge 
them with perfect justice. The condemned will have no recourse against Him, nor any 
valid grounds for appeal—“but the LORD of  hosts will be exalted in judgement, and the holy 
God will show Himself  holy in righteousness” (Isaiah 5:16).
In 
1. 
Isaiah 33:22, three very important offices are ascribed to God. Each one commu­
nicates to us something about the person and work of God and our relationship to 
Him. Identify these three offices and write a brief explanation of the truth they com­
municate.
J
a.  udge
L
b.  awgiver
K
c.  ing
In 
2. 
James 4:12, is found an extremely important truth about God. What does this 
Scripture teach us about God and our relationship to Him?
The Foundation of God’s Law
Why has God declared some things to be ‘right’ and others to be ‘wrong’? Is the law 
of God nothing more than an arbitrary set of rules? Is there a reason behind all these 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Lawgiver and Judge  157
commands and prohibitions? What is the true essence or heart of the law? These are very 
important questions, and if we are to have a correct understanding of God’s law we must 
give them careful consideration. The following statements are helpful:
God is the self-existent Creator, Sustainer, and Lord of all. It is right for God to rule 
1. 
over and judge all that He has made and sustains. It is right for Him to establish His 
laws and hold His creatures accountable for them.
God is the only basis for morality. Why are some things ‘good’ and other things ‘evil’? 
2. 
What is the basis for determining whether something is ‘right’ or ‘wrong’? The Bible 
teaches that God is good. That which is like God (i.e. conforms to His character) is 
‘good’; and that which is not like God (i.e. contradicts or opposes His character) is 
‘evil.’ Apart from God, there can be no law, no right or wrong; no good or evil.
God’s laws are an expression of who He is. God’s laws are not arbitrary rules that He 
3. 
has capriciously chosen, but a reflection of His character—holiness, righteousness, 
benevolence, etc. Sometimes, even Christians speak of the law as though it were a set 
of eternal and universal principles, independent of God and to which even God is 
subject. Again, this could not be further from the truth. It is God who established the 
law, and the law He established is the expression of His very nature.
The Essence of God’s Law is to love Him supremely and to love others as ourselves. 
4. 
This is clearly taught by Jesus to be the ultimate end to which all divine law is directed 
as well as the essence of every command God has ever given (Mark 12:29-31). The 
knowledge that we should love God supremely and others as ourselves is written on 
the heart of every man, and its full implications (i.e. what such love involves) are 
spelled out in clear and specific terms in the Scriptures (e.g. not worshiping idols, not 
stealing, not murdering, etc.).
The Law Revealed in the Scriptures
The law of God is made known to men through the Scriptures. In the pages of the 
Bible we learn that men ought to love God supremely and love their fellow man as them­
selves. It is also through the Bible that the full implications of what such love involves are 
spelled out in clear and specific terms: We love God by not worshiping idols, not stealing, 
not murdering, etc. (Exodus 20:1-17). This written revelation of the law is unfolded with 
greater and greater clarity throughout the Bible, beginning in the book of Genesis and 
reaching its culmination in the New Testament. From Genesis to Revelation, God’s will 
is both revealed and clearly illustrated, therefore the apostle Paul writes in II Timothy 
3:16-17:
“All Scripture is inspired by God and profitable for teaching, for reproof, for 
correction, for training in righteousness.”


--- PAGE BREAK ---

158  The One True God
Although God’s revelation of His law in the Scriptures includes every portion of the 
Bible, God’s will for human conduct was made known with special power and clarity 
on two occasions in Biblical history: at the giving of the Old Covenant to Israel through 
Moses on Mt. Sinai (Exodus 20:1-18), and at the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ, God’s 
ultimate and final word to mankind (Hebrews 1:1-2).
The Law Revealed in the Heart
We have learned that God is the Great Lawgiver who will judge every man according 
to His Law, but this truth brings to mind a very important and troubling question, “How 
can God judge every man according to His Law when a great multitude of humanity has 
never had the privilege of knowing the Scriptures in which the Law is contained?” Ac­
cording to the Scriptures, God has revealed His unchanging moral standard to mankind 
in two distinct ways: (1) He has revealed His will in great detail to some men through the 
written commands of Scripture, and (2) He has revealed His will to all men in a general 
way through the law that He has written on their hearts. In both cases, the revelation of 
God’s law is sufficient to cause all men everywhere to be without excuse on the Day of 
Judgment. Those who have had the privilege of possessing the Scriptures will be judged 
according to the Scriptures, and those who have had only the law written on their hearts 
will be judged according to that revelation of the law. Each man will be judged according 
to the light he has received. As the Scriptures declare in Luke 12:47-48:
“And that slave who knew his master’s will and did not get ready or act in 
accord with his will, will receive many lashes, but the one who did not know it, 
and committed deeds worthy of  a flogging, will receive but few. From everyone 
who has been given much, much will be required; and to whom they entrusted 
much, of  him they will ask all the more.”
Once again, we have learned that God is the Great Lawgiver who will judge every 
1. 
man according to His Law, but this truth still leaves us with the very important and 
troubling question, “How can God judge every man according to His Law when a 
great multitude of humanity has never had the privilege of knowing the Scriptures in 
which the Law is contained?” In Romans 2:12, this problem is set before us with great 
clarity.
According to 
a. 
Romans 2:12, all mankind can be divided into two distinct groups. What are 
these two groups?
Those who have sinned W
i.
ithout the Law. This refers specifically 
to the Gentiles or pagans outside of Israel that had no knowledge of the 
Law of God revealed through Moses. In the wider context it refers to all 
those throughout history who have lived and died without the privilege of 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Lawgiver and Judge  159
knowing the details of the law of God revealed through the written com­
mands of the Scriptures.
Those who have sinned U
ii.
nder the Law. This refers specifically to 
the nation of Israel that had been entrusted with the Law of God revealed 
through Moses. In the wider context, it refers to all those throughout his­
tory who have been privileged to know the law of God as it is revealed in 
detail through the written commands of Scripture.
According to Romans 2:12, what are the consequences of  sin for both groups—those who 
b. 
have known the Law as it is revealed in the Scriptures and those who were never privileged 
with such knowledge?
It is understandable that God can rightly condemn those who have known the written 
2. 
code of the Law and rebelled against it, but how can He justly condemn those who 
have lived and died without the Scriptures, seemingly living their whole life without 
the knowledge of God? The Scriptures themselves provide us with two undeniable 
and essential truths. These truths (presented below) prove that God is right in judging 
all men and demonstrate that all men are accountable before God, even those men who 
are without the Scriptures:
God has made Himself  evident to all men through the creation. What does 
a. 
Romans 1:19-
20 teach us about this truth?
Note: This does not mean that all men know everything that may be known about God or 
that all men are granted the same degree of revelation. It means that all men everywhere and 
at all times possess sufficient knowledge of the one true God so that they will be without ex­
cuse for their sins on the Day of Judgment. Although limited, God’s revelation of Himself to 
all men has not been ambiguous or unclear. He has made it “evident” to all men that there is 
one true God and that He alone should be worshipped. The phrase “within them” proves that 
the knowledge of the one true God is not only demonstrated through the works of creation, 
but that God Himself  has imprinted this knowledge upon the very heart of  every man. The universe 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

160  The One True God
that God has made proves His existence, but this proof simply acts as a confirmation of what 
all men already know—there is one true God who is worthy of worship and obedience.
God has placed His law in the hearts of  all men. What does 
b. 
Romans 2:14-15 teach us 
about this truth?
Note: This does not mean that there were those among the Gentiles who obeyed the Law 
perfectly so as to be righteous before God (see Romans 3:9-12), but that even in pagan cul­
tures there were morals and standards that agreed with the Law—telling the truth, honoring 
one’s parents, prohibitions against murder, etc. This stands as undeniable proof that God has 
written (imprinted, engraved) the essence of His law (love to God and love to one’s fellow 
man) on the heart of every man. Although multitudes are without the written code of the 
Law revealed through the Scriptures, God has written His law on their very hearts and minds. 
Although not as specific as the written Law of Scripture, it is still sufficient to guide them; 
therefore all men will be held accountable for their sin on the Day of Judgment. 
Note: The conscience refers to a moral sense or awareness of right and wrong within every 
man that defends him when he obeys God’s law and rightly accuses him in every act of dis­
obedience. The conscience can be shunned and rejected (I Timothy 1:19) until it no longer 
functions as a moral compass. Paul refers to this frightful state as being turned over to the 
degrading passions of one’s own corrupt heart (Romans 1:24, 26) or having the conscience 
seared as with a hot iron (I Timothy 4:2).
God as Judge
A
ccording to the Scriptures, God has revealed His will to all men and will judge 
all men according to the standard that has been revealed to them. All creatures 
can be assured that God will judge them according to the strictest standards of justice 
and fairness. It must always be recognized that God’s judgment of man is not unwar­
ranted or cruel, but an inevitable consequence of His holy and righteous character and a 
necessary part of His government. A God who would forego judging wickedness would 
not be good or righteous. A creation where wickedness was not restrained and judged 
would soon self-destruct.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Lawgiver and Judge  161
Omniscient Observer
In previous lessons, we learned that God is both holy and righteous, and that these 
attributes stand as an eternal and immutable guarantee that His judgments will always 
be in accordance with the strictest rules of equity and justice. But if we are to rightly un­
derstand the nature of God’s judgments, then as we consider the Scripture’s teaching it is 
essential that we bear in mind on more divine attribute which we have already studied—
the omniscience of God. 
The word omniscience comes from the Latin word omnisciens [omnis, all + sciens, from 
scire, to know] and denotes the attribute of possessing all knowledge. The omniscience of 
God means that He possesses perfect knowledge of everything without having to search 
out or discover the facts. He knows all things past, present and future—immediately, ef­
fortlessly, simultaneously, and exhaustively. There is nothing hidden from God. Every 
creature, and every word, deed, and thought is like an open book before Him. God not 
only knows all the facts, but He interprets them with absolutely perfect wisdom, truthful­
ness, and fidelity. There is never the slightest difference between God’s knowledge and 
reality. The omniscience of God not only proves that He is worthy to judge His creation, 
but it also guarantees that His judgments will always be perfect. God will always judge 
according to His perfect knowledge of all the facts.
In the Scriptures, a name has great significance and communicates something about 
1. 
the person who bears it. What is the name given to God in I Samuel 2:3 and what 
does it communicate to us about His omniscience?
In the following Scriptures, three words are used to describe God’s omniscience. 
2. 
Through our understanding of these words we can begin to grasp something of the 
greatness of His knowledge. Identify each word according to the verse given and ex­
plain its meaning:
P
a.  erfect (Job 37:16).


--- PAGE BREAK ---

162  The One True God
I
b.  nfinate (Psalm 147:4-5).
I
c.  nscrutable (Isaiah 40:28).
The Scriptures affirm that nothing exists outside of the reach of God’s knowledge. 
3. 
He knows all things past, present, and future—immediately, effortlessly, simultane­
ously, and exhaustively. Such knowledge not only proves that He is worthy to judge 
His creation, but it also guarantees that His judgments will always be perfect. God will 
always judge according to His perfect knowledge of all the facts. What do the follow­
ing Scriptures teach us about this truth?
Job 34:21-23
Psalm 33:13-15
Proverbs 5:21


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Lawgiver and Judge  163
Proverbs 15:3
Proverbs 15:11
Jeremiah 17:10
Hebrews 4:13
In Psalm 
4. 
139:1-4 and 11-12 is found one of the most beautiful and thorough descrip­
tions of the omniscience of God as it relates to His knowledge of the deeds of men. 
According to the outline given below, describe this most glorious attribute of God:
Verse 1:
a. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

164  The One True God
Verse 2:
b. 
Verse 3:
c. 
Verse 4:
d. 
Verses 11 & 12:
e. 
According to the Scriptures, there is no depth or secret in the heart of man that is be­
5. 
yond the reach of God’s knowledge. What do the following Scriptures teach us about 
this truth? Complete each declaration and then explain its meaning.
God alone knows the H
a. 
earts of  all men (I Kings 8:39).
God T
b. 
ries the Hearts and Minds (Psalm 7:9).


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Lawgiver and Judge  165
God knows the T
c. 
houghts of  man (Psalm 94:11).
God will J
d. 
udge the Secrets of  all men (Romans 2:16).
In light of the Scriptures we have studied, explain how the omniscience of God not 
6. 
only proves that He is worthy to judge His creation, but also acts as a pledge to guar­
antee that His judgment will always be perfect.
The Divine Judge
Having noted the omniscience of God, we will now consider His place as Judge of 
all. The Scriptures teach us that God is a holy, righteous, and loving Sovereign who cares 
for the well-being of His creation. Such a Sovereign must administer justice, rewarding 
the good and punishing the evil. Because of God’s holiness, righteousness and omni­
science, all creatures can be assured that He will judge them according to the strictest 
standards of justice and fairness. Again, it must always be recognized that God’s judg­
ment of man is not unwarranted or cruel, but an inevitable consequence of His holy and 
righteous character and a necessary part of His government. A God who would forego 
judging wickedness would not be good or righteous. A creation where wickedness was 
not restrained and judged would soon self-destruct.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

166  The One True God
In the Scriptures, a name has great significance and frequently communicates impor­
1. 
tant truths about the person who bears it. What are the names given to God in the 
following Scriptures? What do they reveal to us about His person and place as Judge 
over all?
The J
a. 
udge of  all the Earth (Genesis 18:25).
The J
b. 
udge of  All (Hebrews 12:23).
The above titles reveal God to be Judge of all. In the following we will consider two 
2. 
titles that reveal something of His integrity. What are the names given to God in the 
following Scriptures? What do they reveal to us about the righteousness of His person 
and the rightness of His judgments?
The R
a. 
ighteous Judge (Psalm 7:11, II Timothy 4:8).
A God of  J
b. 
ustice (Isaiah 30:18).
In the following are some of the most important declarations in the Scripture with 
3. 
regard to the judgment of God. What do these texts teach us about the certainty that 
all men will one day stand before God in judgment?


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Lawgiver and Judge  167
Psalm 9:7-8
Ecclesiastes 12:14
Hebrews 9:27
Thus far, we have considered the names of God that speak of His role as Judge, and 
4. 
we have considered some of the most important passages of Scripture that prove that 
He will judge the world. At this point in our study it is necessary that we consider the 
key passages in Scripture that affirm the rightness and fairness of God’s judgments. 
What do the following Scriptures teach us with regard to this truth?
Genesis 18:25
Psalm 96:10-13


--- PAGE BREAK ---

168  The One True God
Isaiah 5:16
In 
5. 
Revelation 20:11-13 is found one of the most awesome passages in all the Scrip­
tures. Read the text several times until you are familiar with its contents and then 
answer the following questions:
According to verse 11, how is the judgment throne of  God described? What truths does this 
a. 
description communicate?
According to verse 11, where is God seated? What truths does this communicate to us about 
b. 
God and His relationship to His creatures?
In verse 11, it is written that heaven and earth will flee away from God and that no place 
c. 
will be found for them. What are the main truths being communicated?
Note: Two main truths communicated are: (1) God is so awesome and overwhelming that 
the whole of creation is not able to stand in His presence. How much less man? (2) This 
present world and its treasures are passing away and will be of no significance on the Day of 
Judgment.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Lawgiver and Judge  169
According to verse 12, who will be standing before the judgment throne of  God on the great 
d. 
Day of  Judgment? According to verse 13, will any be able escape or hide on that day?
Note: The word hades in verse 13 is most likely a reference to the grave or the abode of the 
dead. Men will find no hiding place in the deepest sea, the darkest tomb, or the lowest regions 
of hell. All will be called up to stand before God on the awesome Day of His Judgment.
According to verses 12-13, what do the “books” represent? What is the basis upon which 
e. 
God will judge every man?
Note: All men will be judged according to their deeds (they have all been recorded in the 
“books”) before the throne of God. The only ones who will be saved on that day are those 
whose names have been written in the book of life—those who have trusted in Christ and His 
perfect work of salvation on their behalf (v.15).
To conclude our study of the judgement of God we will consider how the Christian 
6. 
should live in light of the certainty of God’s righteous judgement. What do the fol­
lowing Scriptures teach us?
Confidence in Christ alone:
a. 
Romans 5:1 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

170  The One True God
Philippians 3:3
Hebrews 10:17-23
Obedience:
b. 
II Corinthians 5:9-10
Godliness:
c. 
II Peter 3:11-14
Reverent worship:
d. 
Revelation 14:7


--- PAGE BREAK ---

God is Lawgiver and Judge  171
Gravity:
e. 
I Peter 4:7
Hope and joy:
f. 
Psalm 96:10-13
Commitment of  both ourselves and our causes to God:
g. 
Romans 12:19
I Peter 2:23
Psalm 37:5-6


--- PAGE BREAK ---

“ ‘For from the rising of the sun even to its setting, My 
name will be great among the nations, and in every place 
incense is going to be offered to My name, and a grain 
offering that is pure; for My name will be great among the 
nations,’ says the LORD of hosts.”
– Malachi 1:11 –


--- PAGE BREAK ---

  173
Lesson Fourteen
The Names of 
God
What’s in a Name?
I
n the Hebrew culture, one’s name is not a mere title, but an expression or revela­
tion of the person. In the Scriptures, we find several examples of this: Abraham 
means the Father of  a Multitude (Genesis 17:5), Jacob means one who takes by the heel or one 
who supplants (Genesis 25:26; 27:36), Nabal means fool (I Samuel 25:25), and Barnabas 
means Son of  Encouragement (Acts 4:36). All these names reflect the character of the men 
that bore them. In a similar manner the names of God are inseparable from His person. 
They are meant to be received as a faithful revelation of Him. Each and every name 
of God expresses some truth about His character and person. In the following we will 
briefly consider the names of God. There are no exercises included in this portion of our 
study; simply consider each name carefully and prayerfully.
The Names of God
God (Hebrew: El)
The word el is one of the oldest and most common names for God employed by 
Semitic peoples (Babylonian, Phoenician, Aramaic, Hebrew). The exact meaning of 
the word is uncertain. It probably denotes power, strength, greatness, and majesty. This 
name is used 208 times in the Scriptures (Exodus 34:14; Psalm 19:1; Isaiah 43:12).


--- PAGE BREAK ---

174  The One True God
God (Hebrew: Eloah)
The exact meaning of the word eloah is uncertain. It probably communicates the 
same ideas as el—power, strength, greatness, and majesty. The word occurs 56 times in 
the Old Testament—41 times in the book of Job. (See Job 22:12; 27:3; 27:8; 33:12; 37:22; 
40:2).
God (Hebrew: Elohim)
The word elohim is the first name of God that appears in the Scriptures (Genesis 
1:1) and is used with reference to God more than almost any other name in the Scrip­
tures (2,570 times). The name elohim is probably the plural form of eloah and commu­
nicates the same ideas of strength and power. In the Scriptures, elohim is translated in 
four distinct ways, depending on the context. The word may refer to: (1) God, (2) gods, 
(3) angels, or (4) judges. The fact that elohim is a plural word is very important and has 
two possible interpretations: First, all Semitic languages use the plural to communicate 
that something is exceptional or unique. A small body of water would be called ‘water’, 
whereas an immense body of water would be called ‘waters’. The plural word elohim is 
used with regard to God, not because there is more than one God, but because He is the 
great and incomparable God, the one true God above all gods. Second, the plural word 
elohim may possibly denote the plurality of persons within the Trinity.
God (Aramaic: Elah / Greek: Theos)
The Aramaic word elah is translated God in the Aramaic portions of the books of 
Ezra (4:8-6:18; 7:12-26) and Daniel (2:4b-7:28). The Greek word theos is translated God 
throughout the New Testament. Neither of the words contributes anything new to the 
biblical understanding of God. By using them, the writers of Scripture are not affirming 
the erroneous ideas that the Greeks and Aramaic peoples held about God.
Most High (Hebrew: Elyon / Aramaic: Illai / Greek: 
Hupsistos)
The Hebrew word elyon is translated Most High, and denotes the exalted state and 
indescribable majesty of God. In Psalm 97:9, we read, “For You are the LORD Most 
High over all the earth; You are exalted far above all gods.” The word is used 31 times 
in the Scriptures. In the Aramaic passages of Daniel (2:4b-7:28), the name Most High is 
translated from the Aramaic word illai. In the New Testament, the name Most High is 
translated from the Greek word hupsistos (Mark 5:7; Luke 1:32, 35, 76; 6:35; 8:28; Acts 
7:48; 16:17; Hebrews 7:1).


--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Names of God  175
Almighty (Hebrew: Shaddai / Greek: Pantokrátor)
The Hebrew word shaddai is translated Almighty, and denotes the infinite power of 
God. In the Septuagint (the Greek translation of the Hebrew Old Testament), the word is 
translated by the word pantokrátor (all powerful), and in the Latin Vulgate, it is translated 
omnipotens, from which we derive the English word omnipotent.
Lord (Hebrew: Adon, Adonai)
The name Adon denotes both lordship and ownership. In the Scriptures, when the 
name is found in its plural form (i.e. Adonai) it always refers to God. The plural form 
denotes intensity—God is the absolute Lord of  all things without exception (see Elohim above). 
The title Adonai denotes the Lordship of God over all creation. It also communicates a 
great deal about the relationship that exists between God and His people. As Owner and 
Master, God is committed to care for His people and provide for their needs. As servants 
of the Master, we are to be committed to serve Him in absolute obedience. The name 
Adonai appears 456 times in the Scriptures with reference to God.
Lord (Hebrew: Yahweh or Jehovah)
The name Yahweh is the personal name of God and the one most employed in the 
Scriptures (6,825 times). In Hebrew, the name is written in the form of a tetragram (a 
word with four letters): YHVH. Although it is not known for certain, the true pronun­
ciation is probably Yahveh or Yahweh. The great majority of Bible scholars believe that 
the name Yahweh comes from the verb hayáh—to be (Exodus 3:14). The name denotes 
the eternality, immutability, and uniqueness of God. It is important to recognize that the 
Lord Jesus Christ applied this name to Himself (John 8:58-59), and thus affirmed His 
deity.
Lord (Hebrew: Yah)
The name Yah is the contracted form of Yahweh. It appears 48 times in the Scriptures, 
mostly in the book of Psalms and in the exclamation hallelu[ jah] (i.e. “Praise Yahweh!” 
or “Praise the Lord!”). The word yah also forms part of several personal names in the 
Scriptures: Eli[ jah]—(i.e. “My God is Yahweh” or “Yahweh is God”).


--- PAGE BREAK ---

176  The One True God
Lord (Greek: kúrios or kyrios)
For the Greeks, the word kyrios could refer to a man of high position and power or to 
a supernatural being (i.e. a god). The word is used in the Septuagint (the Greek transla­
tion of the Hebrew Old Testament) in place of the Hebrew name Yahweh or Jehovah, and 
in the New Testament to communicate the Hebrew idea of God as Lord. The word is 
employed 640 times in the New Testament as a reference to God. It is significant that the 
word kyrios is used without reservation with reference to Jesus.
Lord (Greek: despótes)
The Greek word despótes denotes ownership and absolute lordship. In its oldest use, 
the despotés was the master of the house who ruled with absolute authority. In time, the 
term came to denote someone of unlimited or even tyrannical political authority. Today, 
the term is most often used negatively for the simple reason that absolute power cor­
rupts fallen men absolutely. When the term is ascribed to God in the Septuagint and the 
New Testament, it communicates nothing negative. God is the rightful Owner and Lord 
of what He has made. His holiness and righteousness guarantee that He will always use 
His absolute authority with perfect justice. The term despotés is used 6 times in the New 
Testament with reference to God (Luke 2:29; Acts 4:24; II Timothy 2:21; II Peter 2:1; 
Jude 1:4; Revelation 6:10). In II Peter 2:1 and Jude 1:4, the reference is specifically to 
Jesus Christ.
A Closer Look at Yahweh
I
n the following, we will briefly consider the compound names of God that are 
formed using the name Yahweh. Each name will give us greater insight into the 
person and work of God.
The Lord of Hosts (Hebrew: Yahweh-Sabaoth)
The name Yahweh-Sabaoth represents God as the omnipotent King and Warrior who 
rules and protects His people. The word hosts may refer to: (1) angelic beings or (2) the 
cosmos—sun, stars, and the forces of nature. The idea communicated is that the Lord 
rules over all beings and things whether they be earthly, cosmic, or heavenly. He carries 
out His perfect will and there are none who can oppose Him. (Psalm 24:10; Isaiah 6:1-5; 
Isaiah 31:4-5).


--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Names of God  177
The Lord Most High (Hebrew: Yahweh-Elyon)
The name Yahweh-Elyon speaks of the sovereignty, exaltation, and majesty of Yah­
weh. God is Lord over all and above all—He is worthy of all worship and praise (Psalm 
7:17; 47:2; 97:9).
The Lord will Provide (Hebrew: Yahweh-Jireh)
This name was ascribed to God by the patriarch Abraham in Genesis 22:14. In obedi­
ence to God’s command, Abraham placed his son Isaac on the altar as a sacrifice. Before 
Abraham could strike his son, God detained him and provided a ram in his place. The 
redemption that God provided that day on Mount Moriah motivated Abraham to call 
the place Yahweh-Jireh. Although it is true that God is powerful and faithful to supply all 
our needs, the name Yahweh-Jireh is not a promise of economic prosperity, but a promise 
of redemption from sin. We should die for our sins (Romans 6:23), but Yahweh-Jireh has 
provided a sacrifice in our place—His only begotten and beloved Son. He is the Lamb 
that takes away the sin of the world (John 1:29). It is near blasphemy to emphasize eco­
nomic prosperity over redemption. Jesus did not shed His blood for our monetary gain, 
but for the salvation of our souls—the redemption of the soul is costly (Psalm 49:8).
The Lord is my Standard (Hebrew: Yahweh-Nissi)
This name was ascribed to God by Moses in Exodus 17:15 after God defeated the 
army of the Amalekites. In ancient times, the troops would rally together around a stan­
dard or banner in preparation for battle. The truth communicated here is that God is the 
standard of His people. When we rally around Him, our victory is sure.
The Lord that Sanctifies (Hebrew: Yahweh-Qadesh)
This name appears for the first time in Exodus 31:13 and several times in the book of 
Leviticus (20:8; 21:8, 15, 23; 22:9, 16, 32). The word sanctify (Hebrew: qadash) means to 
separate something or someone from common use and to consecrate or dedicate them to 
some special purpose. The name Yahweh-qadesh communicates many wonderful truths 
to the people of God. God has separated us from the rest of the peoples of the earth, He 
has consecrated us for His service, and He is working to conform us to His image.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

178  The One True God
The Lord is my Shepherd (Hebrew: Yahweh-Raah)
This name is found in one of the most well-known and beloved chapters in all the 
Scriptures—Psalm 23. For the people of God, the name Yahweh-raah is one of the most 
esteemed. God is the pastor of His people. He loves them, feeds them, guides them and 
guards them from their enemies (Genesis 48:15; 49:24; Psalm 28:9; Isaiah 40:11; Ezekiel 
34:12; Micah 7:14; John 10:1-42; Revelation 7:17). In the New Testament, God is present 
in Jesus Christ as the Good Pastor that lays down His life for His sheep (John 10:11).
The Lord your Healer (Hebrew: Yahweh-Rafah)
This name is found in Exodus 15:26, where Moses communicates God’s promise to 
Israel: “If you will give earnest heed to the voice of the LORD your God, and do what is 
right in His sight, and give ear to His commandments, and keep all His statutes, I will put 
none of the diseases on you which I have put on the Egyptians; for I, the LORD, am your 
healer.” The name Yahweh-rafah assures us that we can trust in the Lord’s providential 
care. He has healed us from the mortal illness of sin, and is able to heal us physically if 
by such healing His will and glory may be promoted.
The Lord is Peace (Hebrew: Yahweh-Shalom)
This name is found in Judges 6:22-24 and communicates one of the most important 
aspects of the relationship that exists between God and His people—peace. In this pas­
sage, Gideon had seen the awesome revelation of God through the Angel of the Lord 
and is sure that he will die because of the vision. Such dread is common whenever sinful 
man has an encounter with Holy God. In the case of Gideon and the people of God, the 
grace of  God changes such terror to peace. This truth finds its greatest fulfillment in the Lord 
Jesus Christ who is our peace (Ephesians 2:14).
The Lord is Here or Personally Present (Hebrew: 
Yahweh-Sama)
This name is found in Ezekiel 48:35 where God promises His presence in the com­
plete restoration of His people in the latter days. The presence of God has always been a 
very special blessing for the people of God. Adam walked with God in Eden before his 
fall and judgment (Genesis 3:8). In Exodus 33:12-16, Moses asked that the presence of 
God might accompany Israel in her journey through the wilderness. In I Kings 8:10-11, 
God blessed His people by filling the temple with His presence. In the New Testament, 
the promise of God’s presence was fulfilled in its most perfect way through Jesus Christ. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Names of God  179
In Him, God was made flesh and dwelt among men (John 1:1, 14). In the Church, God 
not only dwells with His people, but in His people through the Holy Spirit (John 14:17). 
In the consummation of all things, God will dwell with and within His people in the 
New Heavens and New Earth (Revelation 21:1-3; Romans 8:11).
The Lord our Righteousness (Hebrew: Yahweh-
Tsidkenu)
This name is found in Jeremiah 23:5-6. In this text God promises that the Messiah 
will both “save” His people and will “rule over” them with perfect righteousness. This 
prophecy has also found its perfect fulfillment in Jesus Christ. Through His perfect life, 
atoning death, and heavenly intercession. He has made His people righteous and He 
rules over them with perfect righteousness. Our righteousness is not our own, but Jesus 
Christ, who is the Lord Yahweh, is our righteousness.
Divine Names, Titles, and Metaphors
I
n the following, is a listing of the many other names, titles, and metaphors that are 
ascribed to God in the Scriptures with important references for each. Again, each 
name will give us greater insight into the person and work of God. Be certain to look up 
and study each of the references for yourself.
Names that Reflect God’s Glory and Majesty (8)
God of Gods: Deuteronomy 10:17; Psalm 136:2; Daniel 2:47; 11:36
God of Glory: Psalm 29:3; Acts 7:2
God in Heaven Above and on Earth Beneath: Joshua 2:11
Invisible God: Colossians 1:15
Blessed God: I Timothy 1:11
Majestic Glory: II Peter 1:17
Majesty in the Heavens: Hebrews 8:1
He Who is to be Feared: Psalm 76:11
Names that Reflect the Eternality of God (6)
Everlasting or Eternal God: Genesis 21:33; Deuteronomy 33:27; Isaiah 40:28;
Romans 16:26


--- PAGE BREAK ---

180  The One True God
Ancient of Days: Daniel 7:9-10, 13-14, 22
I Am: Exodus 3:13-14; John 8:56-58
Alpha and Omega: Revelation 1:8; 21:6; 22:13
The Beginning and the End: Revelation 21:6
The First and the Last: Isaiah 41:4; 44:6; Revelation 22:13
Names that Reflect the Holiness and
 Justice of God (6)
The Holy One: Proverbs 9:10; Isaiah 40:25; 43:15; Hosea 11:9; Habakkuk 1:12
Holy God: I Samuel 6:20
Jealous God: Joshua 24:19
God of Justice: Isaiah 30:18
Righteous God: Isaiah 45:21
Righteous Judge: Psalm 7:11
Names that Reflect the Power and 
Sovereignty of God (29)
Creator: Romans 1:25
Architect and Builder: Hebrews 11:10
Possessor of Heaven and Earth: Genesis 14:19, 22
Potter: Romans 9:20-21
Mighty One: Luke 1:49
God of all Flesh: Jeremiah 32:27
God of all the Earth: Isaiah 54:5
God of all the Kingdoms of the Earth: Isaiah 37:16
Mighty God: Isaiah 9:6
Great and Awesome God: Nehemiah 1:5
Great, Mighty, and Awesome God: Deuteronomy 10:17
Great God and King Above all Gods: Psalm 95:3
Great King over all the Earth: Psalm 47:2
Living God and Everlasting King: Jeremiah 10:10
King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible: I Timothy 1:17
King from Old: Psalm 74:12
King of all the Earth: Psalm 47:7
King of the Nations: Jeremiah 10:7
King of Heaven: Daniel 4:37


--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Names of God  181
King of Kings: I Timothy 6:15; Revelation 17:14; 19:16
Lord of Heaven: Daniel 5:23
Lord of the Whole Earth: Psalm 97:5
Lord of Heaven and Earth: Luke 10:21; Acts 17:24
Lord of Kings: Daniel 2:47
Lord of Lords: Deuteronomy 10:17; Psalm 136:3; I Timothy 6:15; Revelation 17:14; 
19:16
Lord of the Harvest: Matthew 9:37-38
Blessed and only Sovereign: I Timothy 6:15
Lawgiver: Isaiah 33:22; James 4:12
Judge of all the Earth: Genesis 18:25
Names that Reflect the Judgment and
 Wrath of God (7)
Jealous God: Exodus 20:4-5; Deuteronomy 4:24; Joshua 24:19-20
Consuming Fire: Deuteronomy 4:24; Hebrews 12:29
Jealous and Avenging God: Nahum 1:2
God of Recompense: Jeremiah 51:56
Watcher of Men: Job 7:20
Judge of all the Earth: Genesis 18:25; Psalm 94:2
Righteous Judge: Psalm 7:11
Names that Reflect God’s Relationship
with His People
God is the Only God and Creator of His People (4)
True God: Jeremiah 10:10; John 17:3
Creator: Isaiah 43:7, 15; 44:2, 21
Faithful Creator: I Peter 4:19
Maker: Psalm 95:6; 149:2-3; Isaiah 54:5
God is Intimate with His People (10)
Father: Psalm 103:13; Isaiah 64:8; Malachi 1:6; 2:10; John 20:17; I John 3:1
Holy Father: John 17:11


--- PAGE BREAK ---

182  The One True God
Righteous Father: John 17:25
Father of Mercies: II Corinthians 1:3
Father of Lights: James 1:17
Father of Glory: Ephesians 1:17
Heavenly Father: Matthew 6:14
Father of Spirits: Hebrews 12:9
Abba Father: Romans 8:15; Galatians 4:6
Husband: Isaiah 54:5
God is the Faithful One Who Loves and
Forgives His People (9)
God of Truth: Psalm 31:5; Isaiah 65:16
Faithful God: Deuteronomy 7:9
Compassionate God: Deuteronomy 4:31
Gracious and Compassionate God: Nehemiah 9:31; Psalm 86:15
Forgiving God: Psalm 99:8
God of all Grace: I Peter 5:10
God of Peace: Romans 15:33; 16:20; I Thessalonians 5:23; Hebrews 13:20
God of Love and Peace: II Corinthians 13:11
God of all Comfort: II Corinthians 1:3
God Reigns Over His People (4)
King: Isaiah 33:22; 43:15
Great King: Psalm 48:2
Lawgiver: Isaiah 33:22; James 4:12
Judge: Isaiah 33:22; James 4:12; 5:9
God Saves His People (9)
Redeemer: Job 19:25; Psalm 19:14; Isaiah 44:24; 54:5; Jeremiah 50:34
Redeemer from of Old: Isaiah 63:16
Horn of my Salvation: II Samuel 22:3
Deliverer: II Samuel 22:2; Psalm 40:17; Psalm 144:2
Saving Defense: Psalm 28:8
Salvation: Exodus 15:2; Psalm 27:1; 62:1-2; 118:14; Isaiah 12:2
Savior: II Samuel 22:3; Isaiah 45:21; Luke 1:47; I Timothy 1:1; Jude 1:25
Savior of all Men: I Timothy 4:10
Strength of my Salvation: Psalm 140:7


--- PAGE BREAK ---

The Names of God  183
God Gives Security to His People (26)
Rock: Deuteronomy 32:4, 31; II Samuel 22:2, 32, 47; Psalm 62:6-7
Everlasting Rock: Isaiah 26:4
Rock of our Salvation: Psalm 95:1
Rock of Strength: Psalm 31:1-2
Rock of my Strength: Psalm 62:7
Rock of Habitation: Psalm 71:3
Fortress: II Samuel 22:2; Psalm 71:3; 91:2 144:2
Stronghold: Psalm 59:9, 16-17; 144:2; Jeremiah 16:19
Tower of Strength: Psalm 61:3
Strong Tower: Proverbs 18:10
Sanctuary: Isaiah 8:13-14
Refuge: Psalm 59:16; 61:3; 62:7; 91:2
Refuge in the Day of Distress: Jeremiah 16:19
Refuge from the Storm: Isaiah 25:4
Hiding Place: Psalm 32:7; 119:114
Dwelling Place: Deuteronomy 33:27; Psalm 91:9
Shade from the Heat: Isaiah 25:4
Defense of my Life: Psalm 27:1
Defense for the Helpless: Isaiah 25:4
Defense for the Needy in his Distress: Isaiah 25:4
Shield: Genesis 15:1; II Samuel 22:3, 31; Psalm 3:3; 18:2, 30; 28:7; 115:9-11; 119:114; 
144:2; Proverbs 2:7; 30:5
Shield of our Help: Deuteronomy 33:29
Wall of Fire: Zechariah 2:5
Father of the Fatherless: Psalm 68:5
Judge of the Widows: Psalm 68:5
Strength of my Heart: Psalm 73:26
God Fights for His People (6)
Warrior: Exodus 15:3; Isaiah 42:13
Man of War: Isaiah 42:13
Dread Champion: Jeremiah 20:11
Sword of our Majesty: Deuteronomy 33:29
Consuming Fire: Deuteronomy 9:3
Lion: Isaiah 31:4-5


--- PAGE BREAK ---

184  The One True God
God Helps His People (4)
Strength: Exodus 15:2; Psalm 18:1; 28:8; Jeremiah 16:19; Habakkuk 3:19
Helper: Psalm 30:10; Hebrews 13:6
Stay: Psalm 18:18
Very Present Help in Trouble: Psalm 46:1
God Sustains His People (7)
Sun: Psalm 84:11; Malachi 4:2
Shade: Psalm 121:5; Isaiah 25:4
Dew: Hosea 14:5
Fountain of Living Waters: Jeremiah 2:13; 17:13
Life: John 14:6; Colossians 3:4
Light: Psalm 27:1; Micah 7:8; I John 1:5
Everlasting Light: Isaiah 60:19-20
God Cares for His People (10)
God Who Sees: Genesis 16:7-14
Shepherd: Psalm 23:1; Isaiah 40:11; Ezekiel 34:11-16
Chief Shepherd: I Peter 5:4
Great Shepherd: Hebrews 13:20
Good Shepherd: John 10:11, 14
Shepherd and Guardian of our Souls: I Peter 2:25
Vinedresser: John 15:1-2
Potter: Isaiah 64:8; Jeremiah 18:1-6
Lamp: II Samuel 22:29
Keeper: Psalm 121:5
God is the Reward of His People (6)
Inheritance: Numbers 18:20; Deuteronomy 10:9; 18:2; Joshua 13:33; Ezekiel 44:28
Possession: Ezekiel 44:28
Portion: Numbers 18:20
Beautiful Crown: Isaiah 28:5
Glorious Diadem: Isaiah 28:5
Song: Exodus 15:2; Isaiah 12:2


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---

About The Author
Paul Washer became a believer while attending the University of Texas studying to be­
come an oil and gas lawyer. He completed his undergraduate studies and enrolled at South­
western Theological Seminary where he received his Master of Divinity degree. Paul left the 
states shortly after graduation as a North American missionary to Peru.
Paul ministered as a missionary in Peru for 10 years, during which time he founded the 
HeartCry Missionary Society to support Peruvian Church planters. HeartCry’s work now 
supports over 80 indigenous missionaries in 15 different countries throughout Eastern Eu­
rope, South America, Africa, Asia, and the Middle East.
An itinerant preacher, Paul also frequently teaches at his home church, Grace Life Church 
of the Shoals. At present, Paul serves as the Director of HeartCry Missionary Society and 
resides in Muscle Shoals, Alabama with his wife Charo and two sons Ian and Evan, and one 
daughter Rowan.
About HeartCry Missionary Society
As Christians, we are called, commissioned, and commanded to lay down our lives so 
that the Gospel might be preached to every creature under heaven. Second only to loving 
God, this is to be our magnificent obsession. There is no nobler task for which we may give 
our lives than promoting the glory of God in the redemption of men through the preaching 
of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. If the Christian is truly obedient to the Great Commission, he 
will give his life either to go down into the well or to hold the rope for those who go down. 
Either way, the same radical commitment is required.
The Christian who is truly passionate about the glory of God and confident in His sov­
ereignty will not be unmoved by the billions of people in the world who have yet to hear the 
Gospel of Jesus Christ. If we are truly Christlike, the lost multitude of humanity will move 
us to compassion (Matthew 9:36), even to great sorrow and unceasing grief (Romans 9:2). 
The sincerity of our Christian confession should be questioned if we are not willing to do all 
within our means to make Christ known among the nations and to endure all things for the 
sake of God’s elect (II Timothy 2:10).


--- PAGE BREAK ---

While we recognize that the needs of mankind are many and his sufferings are diverse, 
we believe that they all spring from a common origin—the radical depravity of his heart, his 
enmity toward God, and his rejection of truth. Therefore, we believe that the greatest benefit 
to mankind can be accomplished through the preaching of the Gospel and the establishment 
of local churches that proclaim the full counsel of God’s Word and minister according to its 
commands, precepts, and wisdom. Such a work cannot be accomplished through the arm of 
the flesh, but only through the supernatural providence of God and the means which He has 
ordained: biblical preaching, intercessory prayer, sacrificial service, unconditional love, and 
true Christlikeness.
OUR PURPOSE
The chief end of all mission work is the Glory of God. Our greatest concern is that His 
Name be great among the nations, from the rising to the setting of the sun (Malachi 1:11), 
and that the Lamb who was slain might receive the full reward for His sufferings (Revelation 
7:9-10). We find our great purpose and motivation not in man or his needs, but in God, His 
commitment to His own glory, and our God-given desire to see Him worshipped in every 
nation, tribe, people, and language. We find our great confidence not in the Church’s ability 
to fulfill the Great Commission, but in God’s unlimited and unhindered power to accomplish 
all He has decreed.
OUR CHURCH
The HeartCry Missionary Society is not a para-church organization; rather, we are a 
ministry under the authority and supervision of a local New Testament church and its elders. 
We call ourselves a society simply because the word denotes a proper association of people 
with similar interests, purposes, or passions.  Those of our church and those who faithfully 
support this ministry have one abiding purpose: that God’s Name be great among the nations 
through the redemption of men and the building up of Christ’s bride.
OUR MISSION
The goal of our ministry is to glorify God through the preaching of the Gospel and the 
establishment of biblical churches throughout the world.
Reasons:
A biblical church is the will of God.  The establishment of local churches was the goal 
••
of apostolic ministry (Ephesians 3:10-11, 21; 4:11-13).
A biblical church is the result or ‘mature fruit’ of a genuine work of God. Therefore, 
••
the goal of planting a biblical church will be the means of guiding and validating all 
our missionary efforts.
A biblical church is the “pillar and support” of truth.  Therefore, it is the great and 
••
enduring bulwark against error (I Timothy 3:15). The church is the “salt of the earth,” 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

and the only entity that can preserve a nation or people from self-deceit and self-
deception.
A biblical church is the only means of creating a self-sustaining, ever-multiplying mis­
••
sion effort.
Nature of the New Testament Church:
It is local and visible.
••
It is spiritual and organic.  It is more an organism than an organization, institution, or 
••
mechanism.
It is autonomous—the fellowship is self-governing and self-supporting.
••
It is collective or communal.  Its members are interdependent, ministering to one an­
••
other according to their callings and giftings.
It is doctrinally or theologically driven (vs. pragmatism and cultural sensitivity).
••
It is missionary—the fellowship is directly involved in the establishment of new church­
••
es of like faith and practice.
Its chief end and motivation is the glory of God in Christ.
••
ESSENTIAL CONVICTIONS OF
HeartCry MISSIONARY SOCIETY
Missions is an Impossibility apart from the Power of God. 
1.	
All men of every culture 
are born radically depraved, at enmity with God, and restraining the truth. The conver­
sion of a man and the advancement of missions are an absolute impossibility apart 
from the supernatural power of the Holy Spirit in regeneration. Modern church growth 
strategies and many new mission methodologies often overlook this essential truth.
A True Gospel must be Proclaimed. 
2.	
The Gospel is the power of God for salvation 
(Romans 1:16) and the preaching of the Gospel is the great means and methodology of 
missions. The Gospel is, first and foremost, God in Christ reconciling the world to 
Himself (II Corinthians 5:19). It answers the eternal question of how a just God can 
rightly justify wicked men (Romans 3:26). It points to Christ alone, who bore the sins 
of His people upon the cross, was forsaken of God, and crushed under the full force of 
His just wrath against sin. The Good News of the Gospel is that through Christ’s death, 
the justice of God was satisfied, and salvation was won for a great multitude of people. 
This is evidenced by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead—“He who was de­
livered over because of our transgressions, and was raised because of our justification” 
(Romans 4:25).
The Gospel Transcends Culture. 
3.	
The greatest need of all men of every culture is the 
clear proclamation of the Gospel. Men are saved through the Gospel and continue in 
sanctification through continued growth in the full counsel of God’s Word. Although 
differences in culture are to be considered, it is more important for the missionary to 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

be biblically sensitive than culturally sensitive. A missionary was once asked how he 
preached the Gospel to a certain remote tribe. He declared, “I do not preach the Gospel 
to a remote tribe. I preach the Gospel to men!”
Incarnational Missions is Essential. 
4.	
Although there may be some effective non-per­
sonal means of communicating the Gospel, there is no substitute for one man living 
among a people, teaching the Gospel to them, and living out his faith before them. God 
sent his own Son, and He became flesh and dwelt among us (John 1:1,14; 3:16).
Superficial Evangelism is one of the Great Obstacles to Missions. 
5.	
Non-theological 
preaching, entertaining skits, and Gospel films are no substitute for the biblical exposi­
tion of the Gospel. Inviting men to raise their hands and pray a prayer is no substitute 
for the biblical call to repentance, faith, and personal discipleship. Biblical assurance of 
salvation does not flow from a past decision or a prayer, but from the examination of 
one’s enduring lifestyle in the light of Scripture.
Church Planting is the Primary Work of Missions. 
6.	
There are many gifts and callings 
in the body of Christ, but on all of them are to work together on the mission field with 
the primary goal of planting a biblical church. It is one thing to do mass evangelism and 
to boast of the numbers of decisions; it is quite another to establish a biblical church. 
True Missions is Costly. 
7.	
Amy Carmichael explained that missions is no more and no 
less than an opportunity to die. We live in a fallen world that is at enmity with God and 
opposes His truth; therefore, missions and suffering go hand in hand. Any advancement 
of the kingdom of Christ into the dominion of the devil will be met with warfare. There 
are many countries and people groups where martyrdom cannot be avoided.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

A Word From The Publisher
It is our great aim to see the praises of our God upon the lips of His people. Since its 
inception, Granted Ministries has sought to further the influence of those whom God has 
wonderfully used for our own personal growth in the faith. We do this through the Word of 
God, taught by men whom God has already raised up in His church for such a task. We are 
not attempting to expand our own influence, but rather to be of service to the body of Christ 
by making such teaching available. It is the truest need of the church that she would more 
completely and deeply know her blessed God. In this effort we join our Lord Jesus Christ in 
prayer, “Sanctify them in the truth; your word is truth” (John 17:17).
I have known Paul for nine years now and have seen the influence of his ministry greatly 
enlarged. Our part in that growth is undoubtedly small, but we are thankful to have been 
engaged in the service of Christ in this way for the past six-and-a-half years.  The phone calls 
and emails continue to encourage us, and the work still grows. We encourage you to visit our 
website www.grantedministries.org and avail yourself of what is there.
WHAT YOU CAN AFFORD POLICY
As with all of the resources that we make available, this book is offered to any who be­
lieve they can benefit from it, whether they can pay for it or not. There is a cost for the book, 
but we do not want this to be an obstacle to anyone. If you cannot afford to purchase a copy, 
or if you can only afford a portion of the price, we ask that you write and give us the oppor­
tunity to serve God by providing for His people. Our only stipulation is that you not request 
the book unless you are certain to read it within six months. We do not want to generously 
enlarge your library, but to generously enlarge your spiritual condition.
– C.T. February, 2009 
Granted Ministries Press
P.O. Box 1348
Hannibal, MO 63401-1348
www.grantedministries.org
