https://livingwaters.com/witnessing-to-family-members/

[The Blue Book on Evangelism](https://livingwaters.com/store/books/the-blue-book-on-evangelism/)

Do you find it more difficult to witness to strangers or to family members? Believe it or not, many Christians struggle more with sharing their faith with their family. Some fear damaged relationships, some believe it’s another person’s responsibility, and some don’t know where to start. Reviewing the following questions and answers will help you face these challenges.

**I became a believer about five months ago, and have been absolutely on fire for Christ ever since. My family is having a hard time dealing with that, just as I am having a hard time dealing with the fact that they are not saved. I have tried to witness to them, and show them through my actions the effect that Christ has had on my life, but they are becoming tired of listening. How can I effectively witness to my family members?**

I know the frustration of having witnessed to friends and family, and they are still unconcerned about their salvation. You can’t preach to them every time you see them; that would kill the relationship. It drives me crazy, though, that they could be snatched into Hell forever, and they don’t really care.

Deal with your concerns for them in the prayer closet. Pray for them and then love them, not with words, but with actions. Instead of preaching, continue to show them your faith by your works. Buy gifts when it’s not Christmas or a birthday. Mow lawns, wash dishes, clean cars. Be rich in good works so that they can see that your faith is genuine. Put yourself in their position. As far as they are concerned you have joined some religious cult. Prove them wrong by being sincerely loving, kind, and very down-to-earth. Then witness to them only if they bring the subject up. But make sure you pray for the opportunity and be watchful for it. In the meantime, witness to other Christians’ unsaved loved ones, and trust that God will have some faithful Christian witness to yours.

“Deal with your concerns for them in the prayer closet. Pray for them and then love them, not with words, but with actions. Instead of preaching, continue to show them your faith by your works.”

**My mother is very hardened toward the gospel, and rarely lets me get a word in edge-wise when it comes to religion or politics. She appears to think that most Christians— with the exception of her best friend—are hypocrites, including me. What is the best way to witness to her?**

Pray that her best friend witnesses to her. People often feel very uncomfortable speaking about spiritual things with a relative, but they will open up to a friend or stranger. Why would your own mother think that you are a hypocrite? Make sure your life is without hypocrisy. Ask her what has caused her to think like that, and apologize if necessary. Then strive to honor and love her unconditionally.

**I am trying to share my faith with my father, who I only communicate with through email, and every time I try he either doesn’t respond or gets angry. Can you give me any advice on how to make him understand when I can’t talk to him face to face or have an actual conversation with him?**

Make sure you are using the Law before grace. If he won’t listen to you, you have other means of helping him. Pray for him, and openly show that you love him. Do anything you can to build a relationship with him. If someone sends you a humorous email, forward it to him. Send him gifts out of the blue. When you pray, believe that God will save him. That means no doubts, no fears, no worries. It means thanking God for His kindness in drawing your dad to Himself. Don’t get caught up on issues of election; leave that up to God. You may also want to check out the online evangelistic tools on our website, such as the free movies (LivingWaters.com/movies)

**At what age can you begin to talk to children about salvation? I’ve gone through the process a number of times with my four children, ages six and under, but I also know that abstract reasoning will not begin until the age of nine or ten. So should wait to talk to our children until they’re a certain age?**

That depends upon their maturity. Some children come to Christ at a very young age, but it doesn’t happen too often. The biblical thing to do is to train up the child in the way he should go. Teach him the Law. Soak him in Scripture. Teach him the fear of the Lord. We have a practical book called How to Bring Your Children to Christ . . . & Keep Them There, which you may find very beneficial. It will help you avoid the heartbreaking trap of a false conversion in a child.

Adapted From [The Blue Book on Evangelism](https://livingwaters.com/store/books/the-blue-book-on-evangelism/)