spirit to him that raised up Christ from
the dead dwell in you. He that raised up
Christ from the dead shall also quicken
your mortal bodies by his spirit that
dwelleth in you. And then we read from
the first John the 2 chapter and 20th
verse, but the uncction which you
received of the holy one abideth in you.
And the 27th verse, but the anointing
which you've received of him abideth in
you, and you need not that any man teach
you, but as he has taught you, so walk
ye in it. And we notice where Jesus
plainly said that he will teach you. And
thank God the indwelling spirit is in
every believer for that particular
purpose. And the word of God tells us in
Romans 8:26-27,
"And for we know not what to praise, we
ought, but the spirit himself maketh
intercession for us with groanings which
cannot be uttered. And he that searchth
the heart knoweth the mind of the
spirit." Praise God. And then in the
baptism of the Holy Ghost, an indument
of power from on high, the mighty Holy
Ghost helps us to pray in a supernatural
language. For 1 Corinthians 14:2 said,
"If any man speak in unknown tongue, he
speaketh not unto men, but unto God. For
no man understandeth him, how be it in
the spirit, he speaketh mysteries." And
in 14th chapter, 14th verse of the 14th
chapter of 1 Corinthians, Paul said,
"For if I pray in an unknown tongue, my
spirit prayeth, but my understanding is
unfruitful." The amplified translation
said, "If I pray in an unknown tongue,
my spirit by the Holy Spirit within me
prayeth, but my understanding is
unfruitful." What is it then? I'll pray
with the spirit. That's with tongues.
I'll pray with the understanding also.
I'll sing with the spirit. That's with
tongues. I'll sing with the
understanding also. And so we've seen a
demonstration or a manifestation of the
Holy Ghost here in praying with her
understanding in praying with tongues in
intercession. Praise God forever more.
And then the word of God tells us in the
14 in the 12th chapter of 1 Corinthians,
but the manifestation of the spirit is
given to every man to profit with all.
For to one is given by the spirit the
word of wisdom, to another the word of
knowledge by the same spirit. And he
went on a little later in a chapter said
discerning of spirits by the same
chapter uh by the same spirit to another
faith by the same spirit or special
faith to another the working of miracles
to another gifts of healings to another
prophecy to another diverous kinds of
tongues to another the interpretation of
tongues but all these work of that one
and selfsame self-same spirit divide
into every man severally as he wills and
so there is a manifestation of the Holy
Spirit in the life of the believers
hallelujah and there's a manifestation
of the Holy Spirit in the body of
believers for the word of God tells us
that we are the body of Christ. Paul
writing to the church at Corinth in 1
Corinthians 2:16 said uh uh that ye are
the temple. Know ye not that ye are the
temple of the Holy Ghost. King James
translation but in the amplified
translation said know you not or and
also in the sixth chapter of first
Corinthians also the two verses are very
similar. And in the 19th verse, he said,
"Do you not discern and understand that
you, the whole church at Corenth, are
God's temple and that the Holy Ghost has
his permanent dwelling in you, both
collectively as a body, our group, our
church, and also individually?