https://carm.org/world-religions/buddhism/

Buddhism is a prominent Eastern religion founded in India about 500 years before Christ by a man named Siddhartha Gautama, who came to be known as the "Buddha" or "enlightened one." With roughly 500 million adherents, Buddhism is one of the world's largest religions. While by far most concentrated in Asia, Buddhism has been on the rise in the West since the 1960s, particularly in the Western United States. Not only does Buddhism differ from Christianity on individual claims such as who or what is God or what happens to us when we die, but Buddhism and Christianity also present entirely different views of the world that touch on every subject of importance.


hank you for taking the time to read what I have to say here. Sadly, I think there has been a tremendous lack of real, open discourse between serious, Biblically minded Christians and sincere, believing Buddhists. I hope to see that change. While many sometimes well-intending but often quite ignorant people have sought to paint the false impression that our faiths are remarkably similar and that Jesus Christ and the Buddha taught largely the same thing, this is simply not the case. We disagree on matters as central as who or what is God and what role God should play in our faith and daily life, and on the nature of humanity, the cause of human suffering, and what is to be done about it. We disagree on life and death. When Christians speak of justice, holiness, sin, and redemption, we mean something wholly different than your ideas of karma and right and wrong action, speech, and livelihood. We both make much of the problems caused by human cravings and our base desires, but we believe in very different solutions and would have very different answers to the question of what, if anything, one should desire. Buddha looked around him and rightly saw that all in this life was fleeting and impermanent. Jesus went further, however, and opened the heavens to show us the Father, that we might rest in something that is truly unchanging and eternal. Indeed, our beliefs are worlds apart, and thus the a particular need for us to listen to one another carefully and hear what the other is saying. I truly thank you for listening to me here.

I have no desire to misrepresent your faith. As you well know, there are diverse expressions of Buddhism, and it can be difficult to summarize Buddhism as a whole in a way that fully does justice to all of the varying interpretations of the Buddha’s teachings. I promise that I am trying to do so as truthfully as a man can. If there is anywhere that I have misunderstood or inaccurately presented the facts of what you believe, please write in and show me from authoritative and meaningful sources where I have erred, and I will gladly own up to that and correct it. I have no intention of favoring one form of Buddhism over another, though, and I make no apologies for the fact that I do not present your particular expression of Buddhist thought as the “true” or “real” Buddhism.

I am also writing from the West, and may sometimes have to give attention to manners of thinking about Buddhist teachings common among self-professing Buddhists here that are alien to the rest of the Buddhist world and quite new to Buddhist history. I also make no apologies for this, though I will do my best to be clear if I am dealing with something relevant only to modern, western Buddhist expressions. I may at times address perspectives found in authoritative Buddhist sources or popular Buddhist writings with which you disagree. If I am being faithful to the meaning of the source I am interacting with, I make no apologies for this either. My concern is not to quibble over personal opinions. While I want to be considerate of the wide range of Buddhist understandings, the opinion I am interacting with can be within the broad realm of Buddhism without being your own. But if I am truly misunderstanding what I am reading, and stating something in a manner that is confusing or wrong, and if you can show me in the relevant sources, I openly invite such honest correction.

As a Christian, my concern is the truth. My goal is not ever to win an argument or sway opinion by deceit or manipulation. It is to deal with reality as it is. I want to speak rightly in all that I do. I am going to be critical of Buddhist teachings. If I thought Buddhist teachings were true, I would be a Buddhist and not a Christian. Even in being critical, however, I want to be entirely truthful.

I do not hate Buddhists, or the Buddha, or any of the beautiful cultures in which Buddhism is found. I have no malice toward you or your faith. I am committed to the truth, and to helping others find the truth as well. While I believe the Buddha was a brilliant and eloquent man who was sincere in his convictions and quite right in many of his assessments of the errors in the dominant philosophies and religions of his day, I have come to the conclusion that the faith that he founded is itself untrue. The Buddha spoke to some of the most important questions in life, and therefore if the answers he came to are incorrect, it matters a great deal. I make no secret that I believe the answers are to be found only in the one true God through the gospel of Jesus Christ, and it is my sincere hope that you will find both truth and peace in Him.

This does not mean that I do not respect Buddhists. Buddha himself criticized the teachings of the Hindu leaders of his day and pointed out their errors without disrespecting them personally. Likewise, I will offer criticism of Buddhist teachings and seek to demonstrate what I am convinced are errors, but I have no disrespect or ill will toward the many precious and honorable men and women throughout the world who believe these errors. My desire to correct the errors is out of concern and respect for the people, not disrespect. My objections may sometimes be pointed, but I never intend them to be harsh. My goal is never to wound, though I am aware that questioning the things we hold most sacred can be painful. My goal is to clear away the obstacles that obstruct our seeing that which is true. My goal is to let the truth shine. My deep and abiding hope is, as my Master once said, that “you will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.”

Buddhism is a group of religious movements that derive from the philosophy and teachings of Siddhartha Gautama, who came to be known as “the Buddha,” or “the enlightened one.” It began in India around the late 6th century B.C. Many views and teachings vary widely among the various Buddhist movements, but the central teachings summarized in what are called the “four noble truths” and the “eightfold path” are at the core of every expression of its teachings. While different strands may nuance these teachings in differing ways, they nevertheless define what makes any sect “Buddhist.”

Brief History of Buddhism
There is little that we can say with certainty about the life of Siddhartha Gautama, but the legends of his life that have been most foundational to Buddhist identity are as follows:What is Buddhism?

He was born a prince in 563 BC in what is today Nepal and was afforded a rather luxurious life. At his birth, a fortune-teller predicted to his parents that he had two possible paths, both destined for greatness. If he remained a worldly man, he would be a great king and unite all the kingdoms of India under his rule. If he forsook a worldly life, however, he would transform the world with spiritual truth. His father desired him to be the former, and so he sought to keep him ensnared by all the worldly pleasures that his wealth and status could afford and did everything in his power to shield him from any suffering or want.

As the legend goes, all was well with Gautama up to his early twenties, when, while walking outside the palace walls, he came upon four sights that would instill in him a discontentedness, thereby leading him to leave his life behind in search of a greater truth. The four sights were that of a frail old man, a person who was visibly diseased, a corpse, and a poor monk walking about, bowl in hand, begging for alms. From these sights, it is said that Gautama first came to know of old age, sickness, death, poverty, and the religious quest for truth.  Once he learned that suffering and death were the inevitable fate of men, he was no longer satisfied with his decadent pleasures.  He is said to have had a wife, his cousin Yosodhara, and a son who he named Rahula (Steven T. Asma, Buddha for Beginners, For Beginners LLC, 2008, 7) which means “fetters” or “shackles” (Ravi Zacharias, The Lotus and the Cross, Multnomah Books, 2001, 30). One night, he could bear his discontent no more, and quietly left his wife, his child, and the comfortable life of his father’s house to pursue the truth, which would form the essence of Buddhism.

He studied with Hindu masters and learned the art of meditation and the best of Hindu philosophy, but he finally concluded that he had learned all he could from them and still had not found the truth he was seeking.  He then joined a band of ascetics who pursued enlightenment through extreme discipline and bodily deprivation. The stories say that he outdid them all in his zeal, at one point reducing his diet to six grains of rice a day and pushing himself to the brink of starvation.  In the end, he found this was also futile.

After years of these efforts, Gautama finally came to the place where he would become the Buddha. He sat under a tree, which came afterward to be known as the “Bodhi Tree” or “tree of enlightenment.”  The legends tell of an evil spirit attempting to distract Gautama with desire, pleasure, fear, and doubt.  Nothing, however, could turn him from the path of enlightenment, and as he sat in meditation under the tree all through the night, he came to a new awareness, discovered the truth, and became the Buddha. The legends describe in cosmic terms how all things in existence rejoiced the next morning at the event of the Buddha’s enlightenment.

The Buddha traveled about teaching the truth he had discovered, gathering to himself a faithful following of devotees, and challenging the Hindu authorities of the day.  At eighty years old, the Buddha breathed his last somewhere around 483 B.C.  Within a century of his death, different factions within Buddhism were already arising.  By the time any of the Buddha’s teachings were written down centuries later, there were already many rival schools and subgroups offering their own interpretations and unique traditions of Buddhist thought (Thich Nat Hanh, The Heart of the Buddha’s Teaching, Broadway Books, 1998, 13-14). There is, however, an essential core of teachings that all groups share, and that certainly goes back to the earliest days of Buddhism’s beginnings. Those teachings are what are called the Four Noble Truths and the Eightfold Path that they prescribe.

Summary of the Four Noble Truths
In a very basic summary, the four noble truths are:

“Dukkha” (typically translated as “suffering”). Because nothing is permanent, constant, and unchanging, therefore nothing can ever truly satisfy. Even pleasure only increases our pain. Sickness and death come to all men. This suffering taints every aspect of life.
Dukkha is caused by our desires. We crave and cling to pleasurable things that will inevitably pass away. We try to avoid unpleasant things that will inevitably come. These cravings are the cause of our suffering, and it is these desires that keep the cycle of birth, death, and rebirth perpetuating this suffering lifetime after lifetime.
It is possible to end Dukkha and thus transcend this cycle to the state of “nirvana” by completely letting go of all cravings and desires.
One attains this escape by following the eightfold path.
The eightfold path in Buddhism consists of:

Right View
Right Intention
Right Speech
Right Action
Right Livelihood
Right Effort
Right Mindfulness
Right Concentration
Though Buddhist schools of thought all accept these central points, they divide over precisely how one ought to interpret them. They also divide over related issues such as the nature of “nirvana” and what role Buddha himself now plays after his physical death.

Anatta and Rebirth
All of this cannot entirely make sense without at least a general idea of the Buddhist picture of life. Unlike the Hindus, who believe there is a permanent divine essence that passes from one life to the next in the cycle of reincarnation, the Buddha rejected this idea.  He believed that man is made up of a variety of physical, mental, emotional, and spiritual factors, but that none of these are permanent. There is not, in fact, any aspect of a person that persists in this life or that passes on to the next life. (Steven T. Asma, Buddha for Beginners, For Beginners LLC, 2008, 52). The Hindu idea of the permanent, divine “self” was called “Atman, ” and so the Buddhist doctrine against this idea is called “Anatta” or “no Atman.”  The precise implications of this vary from one stream of Buddhism to another, but in some sense, all would deny that individual humans have what one would think of as an “enduring self.” Your perception of such is an illusion that must be broken to abandon one’s cravings and find release from suffering. Buddhists often prefer the term “rebirth” to “reincarnation” because, although they do believe in an ongoing series of past and future lives, they reject the idea that there is a constant essence or real “you” that passes continually from one life to the next. There is not any specific, ongoing being that is “incarnated” in each new life. (Ravi Zacharias, The Lotus and the Cross (Multnomah Books, 2001, 23). (Another source used for this article was from: Houston Smith and Phillip Novak, Buddhism: A Concise Introduction, HarperCollins Publishing, New York, 2003.)

The Gospel for Buddhists
by Luke Wayne
April 01, 2016
12 min read
The word “gospel” means “good news.” This is what Jesus came to bring to us. His message is the good news of deliverance from sin, suffering, and death. It is the good news of the way to eternal life, to reconciliation with almighty God, and to an everlasting kingdom where impermanence will no longer poison every good thing with the threat of loss, disappointment, and decay. This good news is for all mankind, for as many as will turn from their sins and believe, and walk the narrow and afflicted way to life.

God: The Giver and Guarantee of the Good News
When Christians speak of God, we are not talking about a mortal and finite spirit who shares the cravings and petty desires of men like the gods in whom many have believed. When we use the word “God,” we mean the unique, eternal, unchanging personal Being who brought all things into existence. God craves nothing, for He is fully sufficient in His own perfect nature. He is all-powerful, all-knowing, and wholly above and beyond all that He created. God is one Being but exists in three persons: God the Father, God the Son, and God the Spirit. Thus, even before creation, God had fellowship and love in His nature. He was His own “I” and “You” and “Us” and “They.” He needed no other. God had within Himself authority and submission, lover and loved, master and servant, Father and Son. God always was and ever will be perfect and all-sufficient. The good news begins and ends with this glorious, unchanging, eternal God.

Creation and Fall
When God created, therefore, it was not because He needed something or lacked something. It is by the compassion of God that we exist, not out of any need or necessity. God created the universe and everything in it out of nothing, distinct and separate from Himself. He formed mankind and gave them dominion over and responsibility for all that lives upon the earth, to work the ground and care for every living thing. God did not need any help from men but blessed them with this dignity and responsibility. The world then was a perfect place. It was life without death and loss.

The first humans, however, rebelled against the will of God. They disobeyed Him, and their evil brought with it death and suffering into the world. From that day forward, the world has been under the curse of man’s evil, and of death and decay. Our death is just and right for our evil, and we are desperate for redemption from our sins.

Sin and Guilt: The Bad News Before the Good
It is not merely that we have behaved unwisely. We certainly were foolish to rebel against God. It is certainly unwise to kill, to lie, to rape, to commit adultery, or to dishonor our parents. It is not, however, merely unwise. It is evil. Such actions are objectively morally wrong. They are sins against a Holy and Pure God who is perfect and just and will not allow such to go without righteous punishment. God is, indeed, so pure that even the pride and greed of our hearts and the evil words of our mouth rightly bare His just and holy wrath.

We have to understand the bad news if we are to make sense of the good news. We have all sinned, and there is no amount of good we can do to balance out the guilt. This is not only because our sin is so bad, but also because that is not how guilt works. If a man has stolen, murdered, or burned down another man’s home, and he appears before a good and just judge in court, what will happen to that man? What if the man says, “Yes, I committed that crime, but look at all these other wonderful things I have done! Doesn’t that make my crime okay?” will the judge ignore the man’s crime and let him go? Of course not! Justice is not about whether you have also done good things, it is about whether or not you have committed the crime. We have all committed crimes against God’s law, and we deserve the punishment not only of death but also of suffering forever in hell, separated from God, the source of all that is good. It is for this reason that we need some good news, some hope of redemption from this condemnation!

Dead Within: Our Deeper Need for the Good News
Our situation, however, is even worse than it at first appears. It goes deeper than the guilt of our actions, down to our very nature.

If your father had died in his infancy, where would you be? You would not be alive. You would be dead, for you would have died in him. When the first man and woman sinned against God and brought death and suffering into the world as a consequence of their evil, they spiritually died at that moment. They become irrevocably broken, poisoned by their evil. They died before their children were ever born. All of their children after them, even down to you and me, therefore, died in them.

Have you ever wondered why every single human being ever born lies? Have you ever met a man who has only told the truth, from his first childhood words until his old age? There is certainly nothing logically impossible about living a whole life without deceiving or lying to anyone (as we will shortly see,  Jesus Himself did just that) but none of us ever do this. We all lie at some point or another. We are all selfish and greedy. We all have impure sexual lusts. We have all done evil.

This is because we are dead inside. We are morally and spiritually broken. We are born in the sin of our first father and mother, and we affirm their sin by sinning ourselves. We are born in sin, conceived in iniquity. There is none righteous, no not one. So we not only need forgiveness for the sins we have committed, but we also need healing for the sinful creatures that we are by nature. We not only need deliverance from our guilt, but we also need our cold, stony, dead hearts to be replaced with living, beating hearts of moral, spiritual life. We need both to be atoned for and to be remade. The good news is that Jesus Christ has come to offer us both!

Jesus Christ: He Who is Himself the Good News
One of the most common phrases in all of the Bible is that God is slow to anger, abounding in love. God could have brought swift judgment on mankind immediately after the first human acts of evil, but God did not. God is patient and compassionate, and instead gave us the opportunity for redemption and deliverance from the guilt of our sin and our broken nature. He did this in the coming of Jesus Christ.

For centuries God promised His people that He would send them a deliverer. He made it clear this deliverer would not be any mere man. For example, the prophet Isaiah predicted 700 years before Jesus came that He would be called, “Wonderful Counselor, Mighty God, Everlasting Father, Prince of Peace” (Isaiah 9:6). As I mentioned before, God is one perfect Being that exists in three distinct persons. At the appointed time, God the Father sent God the Son to come, take on human flesh, and be born as a man. The one and only God was both the sender and the one sent. God the Son took on the fullness of human life while also remaining fully God. This incarnation of the Eternal Divine was the man Jesus, the “Christ,” or the “anointed one.”

He felt all of our pain, our struggle, our loss, and our temptation. Unlike us, however, His perfect and pure moral nature was not drawn away by the temptations of sin, and He lived His earthly life perfectly and without fault.

“For we do not have a high priest who cannot sympathize with our weaknesses, but One who has been tempted in all things as we are, yet without sin,” (Hebrews 4:15)

“He had done no violence, Nor was there any deceit in His mouth,” (Isaiah 53:9).

He did not deserve death or suffering of His own, but He voluntarily took upon Himself the death and suffering of all who will repent and believe on Him, and thus paid the price of our sin, serving our sentence in our place, paying the debt of justice in our stead:

“Although He existed in the form of God, did not regard equality with God a thing to be grasped, but emptied Himself, taking the form of a bond-servant, and being made in the likeness of men. Being found in appearance as a man, He humbled Himself by becoming obedient to the point of death, even death on a cross,” (Philippians 2:6-8).

“Surely our griefs He Himself bore, And our sorrows He carried; Yet we ourselves esteemed Him stricken, Smitten of God, and afflicted. But He was pierced through for our transgressions, He was crushed for our iniquities; The chastening for our well-being fell upon Him, And by His scourging we are healed. All of us like sheep have gone astray, Each of us has turned to his own way; But the Lord has caused the iniquity of us all To fall on Him,” (Isaiah 53:4-6).

“When the fullness of the time came, God sent forth His Son, born of a woman, born under the Law, so that He might redeem those who were under the Law, that we might receive the adoption as sons,” (Galatians 4:4-5).

After three days in the grave, He proved this by rising from the dead and coming forth from His own tomb. He further explained these things to his disciples and then ascended to heaven, returning to His glory in the presence of God the Father. God then poured out His own Spirit upon those who turned from their sins and trusted in the full sufficiency of Jesus as their substitute and Redeemer and who submitted to Him as Lord and Master. The Spirit of God now dwells within God’s people, giving us the new life from within that we so desperately need. As God promised through his prophet Ezekiel:

“I will sprinkle clean water on you, and you will be clean; I will cleanse you from all your filthiness and from all your idols. Moreover, I will give you a new heart and put a new spirit within you; and I will remove the heart of stone from your flesh and give you a heart of flesh. I will put My Spirit within you and cause you to walk in My statutes, and you will be careful to observe My ordinances,” (Ezekiel 36:25-27).

God has, therefore, dealt with the guilt of sins and the spiritual death of all who will repent and trust fully in Him through the life, death, and resurrection of the Son of God in Jesus Christ. All who turn away from sin and self and put their faith in God through Jesus Christ will be reconciled to God and will not have to suffer the just and righteous eternal punishment for their sin. Jesus has suffered for them. All who do not turn from their sins to Jesus will be left to remain in their own condemnation and will be found guilty on the day of judgment. This is good news indeed!

An End to Suffering
Having dealt with the causes of human suffering, the promised time is coming when God will likewise do away with suffering itself. God is patient, and just as He did not bring swift judgment before first offering redemption, He also will not consummate that redemption before first bringing the good news of salvation to all who will repent and believe. You have the opportunity to hear this message today and find life in Him because God has been patient and compassionate to delay. But the day is coming when He will bring just judgment on the wicked and will give eternal life to all those who are in Christ. On that day:

“He will dwell among them, and they shall be His people, and God Himself will be among them, and He will wipe away every tear from their eyes; and there will no longer be any death; there will no longer be any mourning, or crying, or pain; the first things have passed away,” (Revelation 21:3-4).

We do not, therefore, hope for the blowing out or extinguishing of our flame in the realization of Nirvana. We are promised an eternal flame, burning pure and bright, with fuel that is never exhausted and pure, clean air that can never be consumed. As the Apostle Paul, a follower of the Resurrected Jesus, once stated:

“For we know that if the earthly tent which is our house is torn down, we have a building from God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. For indeed in this house we groan, longing to be clothed with our dwelling from heaven, inasmuch as we, having put it on, will not be found naked. For indeed while we are in this tent, we groan, being burdened, because we do not want to be unclothed but to be clothed, so that what is mortal will be swallowed up by life. Now He who prepared us for this very purpose is God, who gave to us the Spirit as a pledge,” (2 Corinthians 5:1-5).

This is the hope God has given us in Christ. This is the hope we wish to share with you. This is the good news!

 Do Buddhists believe in God?
by Luke Wayne
March 28, 2016
9 min read
Buddhism is not compatible with belief in a personal God that is distinct from His creation, has a sovereign will and plan for mankind, or whose grace can deliver one from guilt and suffering. In this most crucial sense, Buddhists do not believe in “God” as Christians would define and use that word. Of course, one can find individuals in the modern West who try to harmonize just about any two contradictory beliefs, but one cannot be meaningfully and consistently Buddhist and believe in anything like a theistic God.

Buddhism and God
While there is a more recent, modern trend to portray Buddhism as simply agnostic on the question of God, this is not the case if we are defining God as Christians (or even as Jews and Muslims) would use the word. First of all, Buddhism teaches that “nothing can be by itself alone, everything must inter-be with everything else.” (Thich Nhat Hanh, “The Heart of the Buddha’s Teaching” (Broadway Books, 1998) 6) Indeed, in Buddhism, to obtain the end of suffering, one must come to realize this “indivisible union” of all things, that there is no personal self and there are no external objects. (Rodney Smith, “Stepping Out of Self Deception” (Shambhala Publications, 2010) 6) The Buddhist, therefore, cannot conceive of “God” as an actual, personal being that is truly unique and distinct from this interconnected oneness that encompasses all things. (Ibid, 4)

Secondly, outside of the idea of Nirvana itself, the Buddhist cannot conceive of anything, much less anyone, as permanent or unchanging. (Keith Yandell and Harold Netland, “Buddhism: A Christian Exploration and Appraisal” (IVP Academic, 2009) 183) Some have even contended that Buddha allowed for the possibility that Nirvana itself might not be permanent. (Stephen Asma, “Buddha for Beginners” (For Beginners LLC, 2008) 110) The idea that everything is constantly changing and that nothing is truly permanent from one moment to the next permeates throughout virtually all Buddhist literature. The impermanence of all things is, in fact, understood (along with suffering and the absence of a real personal self) to be one of the three marks of all existence. (Houston Smith and Philip Novak “Buddhism: A Concise Introduction” (HarperCollins Publishers, 2003) 56-57) An unchanging, eternal God contradicts such a cosmos.

While some might try to equate Nirvana with God, this is a profound misunderstanding. Nirvana is not personal, is not in any sense a creator, and is not capable of action. (Keith Yandell and Harold Netland, “Buddhism: A Christian Exploration and Appraisal” (IVP Academic, 2009) 183) As one scholar notes, “If the absence of a personal creator God is atheism, Buddhism is atheistic.” (Houston Smith and Philip Novak “Buddhism: A Concise Introduction” (HarperCollins Publishers, 2003) 53) The Dalai Lama elaborates further:

“The entire Buddhist worldview is based on a philosophical standpoint in which the central thought is the principle of interdependence, how all things and events come into being purely as a result of interactions between causes and conditions. Within that philosophical worldview, it is almost impossible to have any room for an atemporal, eternal, absolute truth. Nor is it possible to accommodate the concept of a divine Creation” (The Dalai Lama, “The Good Heart: A Buddhist Perspective on the Teaching of Jesus” (Wisdom Publications, 1996) 82 (referenced in “Buddhism: A Christian Exploration and Appraisal” by Keith Yandell and Harold Netland, 183-184))

Buddhism and Polytheism
There is a second sense, however, in which we can ask the question: Do Buddhists believe in “gods.” In Buddhist thinking, are there supernatural beings or entities beyond humanity? Are there conscious things besides merely men and animals? Are there spirits or gods in a sense more like those of the old pagan religions or even those in which the Hindus of Buddha’s own culture believed? Does Buddhism deny these entities? In one sense, yes, in the same way that Buddhism denies all individual things or persons really exist as truly distinct things with real, individual identities. But do Buddhists believe that the gods exist at least in the same sense that you or I or cows or rocks exist? The answer to that is generally yes.

The earliest legends of Buddha’s life have the gods rejoicing at Buddha’s enlightenment. (Houston Smith and Philip Novak “Buddhism: A Concise Introduction” (HarperCollins Publishers, 2003) 4) Some versions even have them involved in making sure Buddha was exposed to events of suffering so that he would come to enlightenment. (Ibid, 6) Many accounts also have an evil spirit present at Buddha’s moment of enlightenment trying to tempt and distract him away from the truth, to no avail. (ibid, 9-12) Travel to any majority Buddhist country in Asia, and one will find no shortage of idols, altars, and spirit houses attesting to a worldview that includes the existence of such temporal deities. In early Buddhist cosmology, the cycle of birth, death, and rebirth included heavenly lives as gods and demi-gods above humanity as well as torturous ghostly births on earth, considered lower than the animals. (Keith Yandell and Harold Netland, “Buddhism: A Christian Exploration and Appraisal” (IVP Academic, 2009) 21)

It is vital, however, to note here that these were still lives caught in the cycle of death and rebirth. The gods are merely a part of the fleeting and ever-changing temporal world. They are in the same ultimate suffering as all else, and in the same need of Buddhist enlightenment to attain freedom in the state of Nirvana and the recognition of the absence of self and distinction. The gods may “exist” in the same tentative and qualified sense that anything can be said to exist in the Buddhist worldview, but the gods cannot help you. On strict Buddhist teaching, it is counterproductive to appeal to them in prayer and offerings or to seek anything from them. They may be there, but that fact ought to be irrelevant to religious practice.

Today, of course, one can find many Western Buddhists who deny that these entities exist in any sense, and this view does not conflict with the practice of Buddhism since the Buddhist is not to appeal to such entities for guidance or help anyway. One might say, then, that most Buddhists acknowledge “gods” but are not instructed to “believe in” them in the sense of any sort of faith or religious devotion (though in practice this kind of religious devotion is common in many Buddhist countries).

If Not God, Then What?
If Buddhists do not believe in “God” in the Christian or monotheistic sense and are not to devote themselves to any “god” in the pagan or polytheistic sense, then is there anything in Buddhist doctrine and practice that might be called the Buddhist god? Yes, in a sense, but we have to be careful how we define it. It is what Buddha spoke of when he said:

“There is, O Monks, an unborn, neither become nor created nor formed. Were there not, there would be no deliverance from the formed, the made, the compounded” (Houston Smith and Philip Novak “Buddhism: A Concise Introduction” (HarperCollins Publishers, 2003) 54)

While the various sects and schools of Buddhism would flesh out and apply this reality quite differently, Buddhists do speak of a pure reality of some sort that is the truth of all that is. The “limitless, vast, mysterious unconditioned” which is not a distinct thing, but rather a description of reality itself as an “inexplicable union.” (Rodney Smith, “Stepping Out of Self Deception” (Shambhala Publications, 2010) 25) Behind our illusion of distinct objects, personal identities, and unchanging realities, there is what really is. There is the interconnected essence of the universe which one cannot properly put into words. It simply “is” and that is all that can be said about it. (Ibid, 25) It is not personal, and it is not distinct or separate from you or anything else. It is not a specific being with a will, plan, or purpose. You cannot pray to it or relate to it as if you were one thing and it was another thing. It is not at all like what a Christian would call “God” or even what an ancient polytheist would call a “god,” but it is the central focus of the Buddhist religion and their hope for deliverance from the suffering of life.

For many traditional Buddhists, if described directly at all, it is spoken of simply in terms of Nirvana. The idea is that there is not any distinct person that is “you.” Nothing exists that is separate from everything else or that persists over time. There is nothing substantially the same from the collection of materials and perceptions you call “yourself” as a child and the differing set of materials and perceptions you call “yourself” as an adult other than a causal chain of events between them. (Stephen Asma, “Buddha for Beginners” (For Beginners LLC, 2008) 60) This is true not only of yourself but every other supposed person and thing.

Once you strip away all these false perceptions of yourself and the world, and there is nothing left to desire and no one left to desire it, there is only what simply “is,” and this is Nirvana. The end of suffering, the ceasing of the cycle of birth, death, and rebirth, pure and proper being. A transcendent “bliss” without self or other. Buddhism is the religion of Nirvana. It is about this state of being, this understanding of reality. This is its only aim and object. In this sense, Nirvana is Buddhism’s “god.” (Houston Smith and Philip Novak “Buddhism: A Concise Introduction” (HarperCollins Publishers, 2003) 53-54)

Some Buddhist traditions would additionally assert that these eternal truths of the unconditioned, unchanging reality of the interconnected universe as it truly is are an eternal guiding principle of enlightenment which they call “Buddha.” The man Siddhartha Gautama who is historically called “the Buddha” was merely a conveyor of the eternal “Buddha” reality of enlightenment and Nirvana. (”The Teaching of Buddha” (Bukkyo Dendo Kyokai, 1966) 13-14, 22-23)

“Buddha is not a physical body, but is enlightenment. A body may be thought of as a receptacle; then, if the receptacle is filled with enlightenment, it may be called Buddha.” (ibid, 31)

These ideas are highly controversial among the Buddhist schools that do not hold to them. Even here, however, this must be understood as an impersonal expression of reality as it is, operating not by a distinct will but only through the causal relations of impermanent things and transient states of being. (Ibid, 31) It is not a supreme being, but rather an indescribable truth that “cannot be made clear by words, it can only be hinted at in parables.” (Ibid, 33) Thus, the Buddhist “God” (if we are to speak of such a thing at all) is not a “being” but rather an indescribable reality which represents all that truly is and which is free from all suffering. The Buddhist hopes to abandon any desire and indeed to lose his very self and for this reality to simply be.

Morality in Buddhism
by Luke Wayne
March 31, 2016
10 min read
While in Christianity man’s primary problem is his sin and guilt before a Holy God, Buddhism teaches that, in reality, there is no right or wrong, and therefore no such thing as sin or moral guilt. “Good and evil” is said to be a false duality that one must transcend in the quest for enlightenment and seeing the world as it really is. As one Buddhist publication explains:

“People make a distinction between good and evil, but good and evil do not exist separately. Those who are following the path to enlightenment recognize no such duality, and it leads them to neither praise the good and condemn the evil, nor to despise the good and condone the evil” (”The Teaching of Buddha” (Bukkyo Dendo Kyokai, 1966) 62)

 It goes on to say at another point:

“It is a mistake for people to seek a thing supposed to be good and right, and to flee from another supposed to be bad or evil” (”ibid, 64)

Buddhism teaches that morality is something we create for ourselves based purely on what is found to be beneficial rather than objectively right or good. There can be no standard outside ourselves and no one to hold us to it. As Buddhist scholar and activist Thich Nhat Hanh says:

“Right and wrong are neither moral judgments nor arbitrary standards from outside. Through our own awareness, we discover what is beneficial (“right”) and what is unbeneficial (“wrong”).” (Thich Nhat Hanh, “The Heart of the Buddha’s Teaching” (Broadway Books, 1998) 11)

The Society for the Promotion of Buddhism agrees when it states:

“There is no discrimination between right and wrong, but people make a distinction for their own convenience” (”The Teaching of Buddha” (Bukkyo Dendo Kyokai, 1966) 53)

American Theravada Buddhist instructor Rodney Smith even chooses to express the Buddhist “eightfold path”, traditionally communicated in terms such as “right view,” “right speech,” and “right action,” instead being “wise view,” “wise speech,” and “wise action,” to avoid “right” being mistakenly interpreted in a moral sense. (Rodney Smith, “Stepping Out of Self Deception” (Shambhala Publications, 2010) 12-15) As one scholar on Buddhism explains of Buddha’s moral philosophy:

“The Buddha approached truth more ontologically than morally. He considered deceit more foolish than evil” (Houston Smith and Philip Novak “Buddhism: A Concise Introduction” (HarperCollins Publishers, 2003) 43)

Walpola Rahula gets to the crux of the matter when he insists that:

“The idea of moral justice arises out of the conception of a supreme being, a God, who sits in judgment, who is law-giver and who decides what it right and wrong” (Walpola Rahula, “What the Buddha Taught: Revised and Expanded Edition with Texts from Suttas and Dhammapada” (Grove Press, 2007) Kindle Edition, Chapter 3)

Rahula therefore calls the concept of justice “dangerous” (ibid). The Japanese Buddhist Masao Abe observes:

“There is no Buddhist equivalent to the Christian notion of justice. Instead, Buddhism talks about wisdom.” (Keith Yandell and Harold Netland, “Buddhism: A Christian Exploration and Appraisal” (IVP Academic, 2009) 193)

Abe goes on to concede that, “Buddhist history shows indifference to social evil, with a few exceptions” (Ibid, 147-148) and even that Buddhists need to, “learn from Christianity how to solve the problem of society and history at large” (Ibid, 193) though, of course, he desires that they would “interpret this in the terms of the Buddhist standpoint of wisdom.” (Ibid, 193)

One cannot, however, build Christian ethics on a Buddhist foundation. Buddha certainly made a lot of ethical statements that a Christian would wholly agree with, such as that you should not kill, steal, or commit adultery. (Houston Smith and Philip Novak “Buddhism: A Concise Introduction” (HarperCollins Publishers, 2003) 44) As we noted above, Buddhism discourages these things purely on pragmatic considerations rather than on moral grounds, but the rules themselves are ones that any Christian would affirm wholeheartedly. The problem is that Buddhism necessarily stops at what you should not do to your neighbor. One is discouraged from murder, theft, lying, frivolous talk, etc. One is told there is merit in abstaining from these things (Steven T. Asma, Buddha for Beginners (For Beginners LLC, 2008) 92) The eightfold path to enlightenment tells us all sorts of things we should not do in regard to others, including our words, our actions, and even our career choices. (Houston Smith and Philip Novak “Buddhism: A Concise Introduction” (HarperCollins Publishers, 2003) 42-45) While Buddhism puts great emphasis on cultivating a sense of compassion, and indeed holds this up as one of the two core values of Buddhism alongside wisdom (Walpola Rahula, “What the Buddha Taught: Revised and Expanded Edition with Texts from Suttas and Dhammapada” (Grove Press, 2007) Kindle Edition, Chapter 5) when it comes to what this actually looks like in practical ethics, they can only point to teachings to abstain from harmful action. (Ibid) While the Bodhisattva ideal of the Mahayana schools of Buddhism has always encouraged Buddhists to be concerned with the enlightenment of their fellow creatures, to press all beings toward Nirvana, (Houston Smith and Philip Novak “Buddhism: A Concise Introduction” (HarperCollins Publishers, 2003) 69) socially engaged Buddhists who are concerned about taking positive action to provide practical help for the well-being of their fellow man, or even to promote simple acts of kindness toward others as part of one’s daily life, is a modern trend influenced by western values and is an extremely small movement within the larger Buddhist world. (Ibid, 42-49)

This is not difficult to understand, as Buddhist doctrine provides no foundation of compassion as an outward, active, sacrificial giving to the needs of another. Buddhism teaches that there is no personal self, and therefore also no personal other-selves. (Walpola Rahula, “What the Buddha Taught: Revised and Expanded Edition with Texts from Suttas and Dhammapada” (Grove Press, 2007) Kindle Edition, Chapter 5) In fact the very idea of personal selves is the foundation for desire and the source of all the world’s suffering. (Rodney Smith, “Stepping Out of Self Deception” (Shambhala Publications, 2010) 4) If this is true, one cannot alleviate suffering by personally giving of oneself to help another person in need. Indeed, such an idea would logically perpetuate suffering rather than alleviate it on the Buddhist conception of reality. Further, Buddhism teaches that we must relinquish all desire:

“Those who seek enlightenment must first rid themselves of the fire of all desires. Desire is a raging fire, and one who is seeking enlightenment must avoid the fire of desire as a man carrying a load of hay avoids sparks.” (”The Teaching of Buddha” (Bukkyo Dendo Kyokai, 1966) 120)

This includes in it that we should dispense with all attachments, even attachments to people we care about. (Walpola Rahula, “What the Buddha Taught: Revised and Expanded Edition with Texts from Suttas and Dhammapada” (Grove Press, 2007) Kindle Edition, Chapter 2) We are not talking here about only harmful desires and unhealthy attachments, but desire and attachment on whole and in total. (Keith Yandell and Harold Netland, “Buddhism: A Christian Exploration and Appraisal” (IVP Academic, 2009) 16) Therefore, when a Buddhist advocates love or compassion, he is not advocating personal commitment to another person or desire for the well-being of other persons. These concepts are antithetical to everything Buddhism teaches. The Buddhist does not see his suffering as personal and distinct from another’s suffering, and so in this sense ought to feel an inner sense of “compassion” or a sense that all suffering anywhere is one. (Houston Smith and Philip Novak “Buddhism: A Concise Introduction” (HarperCollins Publishers, 2003) 36) But the Buddhist is also told not to view painful experiences as distinct from pleasurable ones, or to prefer comfort to suffering. They are not to “lean into” one kind of experience or “away from” another. (Rodney Smith, “Stepping Out of Self Deception” (Shambhala Publications, 2010) 6) It would thus be inconsistent to rush to the aid of oneself or of another alike. Besides, there is no actual person who is suffering that we can have any specific, active compassion on, as the classic Theravada text reads:

“Misery only doth exist, none miserable
No doer is there, naught save the deed is found
Nirvana exists, but not the man who seeks is
The path exists, but not the traveler on it” (Keith Yandell and Harold Netland, “Buddhism: A Christian Exploration and Appraisal” (IVP Academic, 2009) 21)

Buddhism also teaches that any act of volition, any action of the will regardless of whether the motivation is positive or negative and whether the result is helpful or harmful, is to be avoided. Such actions are called “karma” and have the effect of rebirth and future life. Some may have relatively “good” effects and some “bad”, but all rebirth is suffering, and the goal of Buddhism is not a better future birth but rather no rebirth at all. The Buddhist does not seek “good” karma, but rather no karma at all. Nirvana is reality without karma, without will, without desire, and without suffering and the cycle of death and rebirth. (Walpola Rahula, “What the Buddha Taught: Revised and Expanded Edition with Texts from Suttas and Dhammapada” (Grove Press, 2007) Kindle Edition, Chapter 3) The doctrine of karma, then, like the other doctrines we have seen, certainly discourages harmful actions, but it does nothing to promote helpful actions. If anything, it hinders them.

Buddhism, therefore, strongly encourages an ethic of restraint. It upholds the ideal of not doing to others what you would not want them to do to you. Buddhism has no foundation, however, for an ethic of self-sacrificial love for another person, because it allows for no self and no other person. On Buddhism, I can have no duty to my fellow man. I cannot be commanded to positively do for others what I would have them do for me. There is no foundation to love my neighbor as myself. The Bible gives us these. Jesus gives us these. A just and holy God and the merciful sacrifice of Jesus Christ give us these. Buddhism cannot.

On Buddhism, nothing is truly good or truly evil. There is no injustice. There is no sin, no ultimate wrong. There also is no right; no true virtue or good for which to aspire. There is no justice for which to hope. All that matters is the practical benefit of an action, and one is only to be practically concerned with enlightenment and Nirvana. This does not mean that Buddhist individuals never do kind, generous, and helpful things to meet the needs of others. What it does mean is that, when Buddhists do so, they are not acting from the foundation of their Buddhism, but rather from their innate, God-given knowledge that Buddhism is wrong on this point. They are doing what they know to be good and right to do, even while following a way that denies that there actually is a “good” and a “right.”

 Do Buddhists believe in God?
by Luke Wayne
March 28, 2016
9 min read
Buddhism is not compatible with belief in a personal God that is distinct from His creation, has a sovereign will and plan for mankind, or whose grace can deliver one from guilt and suffering. In this most crucial sense, Buddhists do not believe in “God” as Christians would define and use that word. Of course, one can find individuals in the modern West who try to harmonize just about any two contradictory beliefs, but one cannot be meaningfully and consistently Buddhist and believe in anything like a theistic God.

Buddhism and God
While there is a more recent, modern trend to portray Buddhism as simply agnostic on the question of God, this is not the case if we are defining God as Christians (or even as Jews and Muslims) would use the word. First of all, Buddhism teaches that “nothing can be by itself alone, everything must inter-be with everything else.” (Thich Nhat Hanh, “The Heart of the Buddha’s Teaching” (Broadway Books, 1998) 6) Indeed, in Buddhism, to obtain the end of suffering, one must come to realize this “indivisible union” of all things, that there is no personal self and there are no external objects. (Rodney Smith, “Stepping Out of Self Deception” (Shambhala Publications, 2010) 6) The Buddhist, therefore, cannot conceive of “God” as an actual, personal being that is truly unique and distinct from this interconnected oneness that encompasses all things. (Ibid, 4)

Secondly, outside of the idea of Nirvana itself, the Buddhist cannot conceive of anything, much less anyone, as permanent or unchanging. (Keith Yandell and Harold Netland, “Buddhism: A Christian Exploration and Appraisal” (IVP Academic, 2009) 183) Some have even contended that Buddha allowed for the possibility that Nirvana itself might not be permanent. (Stephen Asma, “Buddha for Beginners” (For Beginners LLC, 2008) 110) The idea that everything is constantly changing and that nothing is truly permanent from one moment to the next permeates throughout virtually all Buddhist literature. The impermanence of all things is, in fact, understood (along with suffering and the absence of a real personal self) to be one of the three marks of all existence. (Houston Smith and Philip Novak “Buddhism: A Concise Introduction” (HarperCollins Publishers, 2003) 56-57) An unchanging, eternal God contradicts such a cosmos.

While some might try to equate Nirvana with God, this is a profound misunderstanding. Nirvana is not personal, is not in any sense a creator, and is not capable of action. (Keith Yandell and Harold Netland, “Buddhism: A Christian Exploration and Appraisal” (IVP Academic, 2009) 183) As one scholar notes, “If the absence of a personal creator God is atheism, Buddhism is atheistic.” (Houston Smith and Philip Novak “Buddhism: A Concise Introduction” (HarperCollins Publishers, 2003) 53) The Dalai Lama elaborates further:

“The entire Buddhist worldview is based on a philosophical standpoint in which the central thought is the principle of interdependence, how all things and events come into being purely as a result of interactions between causes and conditions. Within that philosophical worldview, it is almost impossible to have any room for an atemporal, eternal, absolute truth. Nor is it possible to accommodate the concept of a divine Creation” (The Dalai Lama, “The Good Heart: A Buddhist Perspective on the Teaching of Jesus” (Wisdom Publications, 1996) 82 (referenced in “Buddhism: A Christian Exploration and Appraisal” by Keith Yandell and Harold Netland, 183-184))

Buddhism and Polytheism
There is a second sense, however, in which we can ask the question: Do Buddhists believe in “gods.” In Buddhist thinking, are there supernatural beings or entities beyond humanity? Are there conscious things besides merely men and animals? Are there spirits or gods in a sense more like those of the old pagan religions or even those in which the Hindus of Buddha’s own culture believed? Does Buddhism deny these entities? In one sense, yes, in the same way that Buddhism denies all individual things or persons really exist as truly distinct things with real, individual identities. But do Buddhists believe that the gods exist at least in the same sense that you or I or cows or rocks exist? The answer to that is generally yes.

The earliest legends of Buddha’s life have the gods rejoicing at Buddha’s enlightenment. (Houston Smith and Philip Novak “Buddhism: A Concise Introduction” (HarperCollins Publishers, 2003) 4) Some versions even have them involved in making sure Buddha was exposed to events of suffering so that he would come to enlightenment. (Ibid, 6) Many accounts also have an evil spirit present at Buddha’s moment of enlightenment trying to tempt and distract him away from the truth, to no avail. (ibid, 9-12) Travel to any majority Buddhist country in Asia, and one will find no shortage of idols, altars, and spirit houses attesting to a worldview that includes the existence of such temporal deities. In early Buddhist cosmology, the cycle of birth, death, and rebirth included heavenly lives as gods and demi-gods above humanity as well as torturous ghostly births on earth, considered lower than the animals. (Keith Yandell and Harold Netland, “Buddhism: A Christian Exploration and Appraisal” (IVP Academic, 2009) 21)

It is vital, however, to note here that these were still lives caught in the cycle of death and rebirth. The gods are merely a part of the fleeting and ever-changing temporal world. They are in the same ultimate suffering as all else, and in the same need of Buddhist enlightenment to attain freedom in the state of Nirvana and the recognition of the absence of self and distinction. The gods may “exist” in the same tentative and qualified sense that anything can be said to exist in the Buddhist worldview, but the gods cannot help you. On strict Buddhist teaching, it is counterproductive to appeal to them in prayer and offerings or to seek anything from them. They may be there, but that fact ought to be irrelevant to religious practice.

Today, of course, one can find many Western Buddhists who deny that these entities exist in any sense, and this view does not conflict with the practice of Buddhism since the Buddhist is not to appeal to such entities for guidance or help anyway. One might say, then, that most Buddhists acknowledge “gods” but are not instructed to “believe in” them in the sense of any sort of faith or religious devotion (though in practice this kind of religious devotion is common in many Buddhist countries).

If Not God, Then What?
If Buddhists do not believe in “God” in the Christian or monotheistic sense and are not to devote themselves to any “god” in the pagan or polytheistic sense, then is there anything in Buddhist doctrine and practice that might be called the Buddhist god? Yes, in a sense, but we have to be careful how we define it. It is what Buddha spoke of when he said:

“There is, O Monks, an unborn, neither become nor created nor formed. Were there not, there would be no deliverance from the formed, the made, the compounded” (Houston Smith and Philip Novak “Buddhism: A Concise Introduction” (HarperCollins Publishers, 2003) 54)

While the various sects and schools of Buddhism would flesh out and apply this reality quite differently, Buddhists do speak of a pure reality of some sort that is the truth of all that is. The “limitless, vast, mysterious unconditioned” which is not a distinct thing, but rather a description of reality itself as an “inexplicable union.” (Rodney Smith, “Stepping Out of Self Deception” (Shambhala Publications, 2010) 25) Behind our illusion of distinct objects, personal identities, and unchanging realities, there is what really is. There is the interconnected essence of the universe which one cannot properly put into words. It simply “is” and that is all that can be said about it. (Ibid, 25) It is not personal, and it is not distinct or separate from you or anything else. It is not a specific being with a will, plan, or purpose. You cannot pray to it or relate to it as if you were one thing and it was another thing. It is not at all like what a Christian would call “God” or even what an ancient polytheist would call a “god,” but it is the central focus of the Buddhist religion and their hope for deliverance from the suffering of life.

For many traditional Buddhists, if described directly at all, it is spoken of simply in terms of Nirvana. The idea is that there is not any distinct person that is “you.” Nothing exists that is separate from everything else or that persists over time. There is nothing substantially the same from the collection of materials and perceptions you call “yourself” as a child and the differing set of materials and perceptions you call “yourself” as an adult other than a causal chain of events between them. (Stephen Asma, “Buddha for Beginners” (For Beginners LLC, 2008) 60) This is true not only of yourself but every other supposed person and thing.

Once you strip away all these false perceptions of yourself and the world, and there is nothing left to desire and no one left to desire it, there is only what simply “is,” and this is Nirvana. The end of suffering, the ceasing of the cycle of birth, death, and rebirth, pure and proper being. A transcendent “bliss” without self or other. Buddhism is the religion of Nirvana. It is about this state of being, this understanding of reality. This is its only aim and object. In this sense, Nirvana is Buddhism’s “god.” (Houston Smith and Philip Novak “Buddhism: A Concise Introduction” (HarperCollins Publishers, 2003) 53-54)

Some Buddhist traditions would additionally assert that these eternal truths of the unconditioned, unchanging reality of the interconnected universe as it truly is are an eternal guiding principle of enlightenment which they call “Buddha.” The man Siddhartha Gautama who is historically called “the Buddha” was merely a conveyor of the eternal “Buddha” reality of enlightenment and Nirvana. (”The Teaching of Buddha” (Bukkyo Dendo Kyokai, 1966) 13-14, 22-23)

“Buddha is not a physical body, but is enlightenment. A body may be thought of as a receptacle; then, if the receptacle is filled with enlightenment, it may be called Buddha.” (ibid, 31)

These ideas are highly controversial among the Buddhist schools that do not hold to them. Even here, however, this must be understood as an impersonal expression of reality as it is, operating not by a distinct will but only through the causal relations of impermanent things and transient states of being. (Ibid, 31) It is not a supreme being, but rather an indescribable truth that “cannot be made clear by words, it can only be hinted at in parables.” (Ibid, 33) Thus, the Buddhist “God” (if we are to speak of such a thing at all) is not a “being” but rather an indescribable reality which represents all that truly is and which is free from all suffering. The Buddhist hopes to abandon any desire and indeed to lose his very self and for this reality to simply be.

Is Buddhism Compatible with Christianity?d Research Ministry
by Luke Wayne
November 14, 2025
9 min read
Buddhism and Christianity make mutually exclusive truth claims at nearly every essential point. There is simply no way to combine these two systems without completely redefining one or both of them. Since the 1960s, however, as Buddhism has made increasing inroads into western life and as American culture has become more and more pluralistic, one can increasingly find people who self-identify as being both Buddhist and Christian. The argument for this (when one articulates an argument at all) usually goes something like this: Buddhism (it is claimed) is agnostic on the issue of God. There is nothing (it is further claimed) inherently contrary to Christianity in Buddhist thought and practice, and so one can be devoted to the Christian God by following the Buddhist path to enlightenment. These claims are both entirely false, however, and thus the conclusion that follows from them is also false.

Buddhist Agnosticism?
Historic Buddhism acknowledged the existence of a variety of gods and demigods above and beyond humanity but taught that they were mortal creatures which were a part of the same cycle of death and rebirth as men and animals. They were a part of the Buddhist cosmos but were not prescribed as objects of Buddhist devotion. They were bound in the world of suffering and needed enlightenment to realize Nirvana just as men do. (Keith Yandell and Harold Netland, "Buddhism: A Christian Exploration and Appraisal" (IVP Academic, 2009) 21)

Regarding such gods, Buddhism can truly be agnostic. Many modern, western Buddhists reject the notion of gods, and it does not in any way hinder them from being Buddhist. Such gods are not central to any Buddhist teaching, and it makes no difference to Buddhist doctrines whether or not they are there any more than the existence or nonexistence of a particular type of animal would. The gods are merely one of the varieties of beings suffering in the cycle of death and rebirth from which Buddhism seeks liberation.

The Christian God is not like this, however. When Christians speak of God, they are not speaking of a mortal, finite, suffering being like any other being. They are not speaking of a being in need of liberation from anything. They are not speaking of a being that is merely a part of the system of things. They are not speaking of a being that may or may not exist. They are speaking of an eternal, perfect, unchanging, all sufficient creator of everything that is and to whom we all owe our worship and answer to as our Judge and King. In this sense, Buddhism does not believe in God. Indeed, Buddhism cannot possibly allow for such a God's existence. (ibid, 183-184)

Central to Buddhism is the impermanence of all things and the doctrine of no distinct and enduring self in existence. ("The Teaching of Buddha" (Bukkyo Dendo Kyokai, 1966) 298) If there is anything eternal and unchanging, Buddhism is false. If, as Colossians 1:16-17 says, "all things have been created through Him and for Him. He is before all things, and in Him, all things hold together," then one cannot say that all things are impermanent and do not hold together at all, or that there are no actual things. Anyone claiming to be both Buddhist and Christian must either radically alter Buddhist teaching on almost every possible subject, or else they must drastically change what they mean by "God" to such a degree that it is no longer recognizable as anything remotely Christian.

Buddhist and Christian Teaching
Man: Buddhism teaches that personal self is an illusion. There is no "I" or "you" even now, and certainly no soul or spirit of man that transcends this physical life. (Walpola Rahula, "What the Buddha Taught: Revised and Expanded Edition with Texts from Suttas and Dhammapada" (Grove Press, 2007) Kindle Edition, Chapter 6)

Christianity teaches that men and women are created in the image of God and are distinct from and have dominion over other living things on the earth, (Genesis 1:26-28). The person developing in the womb is the same person all the days of their life (Psalm 139:13-16). There is conscious existence after death (Luke 16:19-31), and these same personal selves will rise again on the last day (Acts 24:15), some to eternal life and others to eternal condemnation, (John 5:28-29).

Sin: Buddhism teaches that there is no moral right and wrong. Good and evil are a false duality that the enlightened must overcome. ("The Teaching of Buddha" (Bukkyo Dendo Kyokai, 1966) 62) Rightness and wrongness are merely subjective, (Thich Nhat Hanh, "The Heart of the Buddha's Teaching" (Broadway Books, 1998) 56) a distinction we make artificially out of convenience. ("The Teaching of Buddha" (Bukkyo Dendo Kyokai, 1966) 53) Justice and injustice, Buddhism explains, are potentially dangerous concepts rooted in the false notion that there is a Creator God who rules and judges us all. (Walpola Rahula, "What the Buddha Taught: Revised and Expanded Edition with Texts from Suttas and Dhammapada" (Grove Press, 2007) Kindle Edition, Chapter 6)

Christianity teaches that there is such a God and that there is indeed objective right and wrong. Evil, or sin, is breaking the commands of God (1 John 3:4) and falling short of His standard (Romans 3:23). We have a duty not only to avoid evil but also to do what is good (Galatians 6:9-10) even to those who hate us (Luke 6:27). Indeed, knowing what is good and not doing it is itself evil (James 4:17). The concepts of righteousness and wickedness, good and evil, obedience and sin; these are quite central to everything that Christianity has to say.

Suffering: In Buddhism suffering comes from our illusion of being a personal self and our actions in accordance with that illusion. (Rodney Smith, "Stepping Out of Self Deception" (Shambhala Publications, 2010) 4) Because we think we exist as distinct and enduring selves separate from other objects, we desire things and become attached to things that are, in fact, fleeting and illusory. From this comes suffering. It is not merely unhealthy or improper desires, but rather all personal desires that cause our suffering. (Keith Yandell and Harold Netland, "Buddhism: A Christian Exploration and Appraisal" (IVP Academic, 2009) 16)

Every volition, every act of the will, is karma and perpetuates "samsara," or the cycle of death and rebirth. (Walpola Rahula, "What the Buddha Taught: Revised and Expanded Edition with Texts from Suttas and Dhammapada" (Grove Press, 2007) Kindle Edition, Chapter 3) The Buddhist must learn to be free from all desires, no longer pursuing what is pleasant and avoiding what is painful or thinking of one experience as preferable to another. (Rodney Smith, "Stepping Out of Self Deception" (Shambhala Publications, 2010) 6) He must cease to praise what is good or bemoan what is evil, abandoning all such duality. ("The Teaching of Buddha" (Bukkyo Dendo Kyokai, 1966) 62) This is the Buddhist freedom from suffering.

In Christianity, it is human evil and disobedience to God that first brought suffering and death into the world, (Romans 5:12). What man needs most is to be washed of his guilt and to turn from his sin. While Christians believe that selfish human desires are what lead us into temptation and sin (James 1:14) and that much suffering and strife come from wrong-headed desires that go unfulfilled (James 4:1-3), nevertheless there are also righteous desires that ought to be cultivated. There is blessing for those who hunger and thirst for righteousness (Matthew 5:6), and we are to seek earnestly and consistently after the kingdom of God (Matthew 6:33). In the end, God will satisfy the righteous desires of those who are in Christ. He will bless them with eternal life and remove their suffering forever, (Revelation 21:3-4).

Salvation: Different Buddhist branches prescribe a variety of differing things regarding the most effective path to enlightenment and escape from the suffering of life and the cycle of death and rebirth. At a minimum, however, all hold to the centrality of adherence to the Eightfold path laid out by Buddha for one to escape the suffering cycle through the self-disciplined reshaping of one's thoughts, views, speech, and actions. (Walpola Rahula, "What the Buddha Taught: Revised and Expanded Edition with Texts from Suttas and Dhammapada" (Grove Press, 2007) Kindle Edition, Chapter 5) As one ceases from karmic action, personal desire, and the illusion of self-existence, one attains to enlightenment, realizes Nirvana, and thus transcends suffering and the cycle of rebirth.

In Christianity, salvation is the forgiveness of sins and bodily resurrection unto eternal life with God. This is not earned or merited but is the gracious gift of God which we receive through repentance and faith. (John 3:16-21)

Eternity: The Buddhist hope is for the realization of Nirvana. Nirvana means to blow out or extinguish, like a flame deprived of air or exhausting its fuel. (Houston Smith and Philip Novak "Buddhism: A Concise Introduction" (HarperCollins Publishers, 2003) 51) It is not the extinguishing of one's personal existence since Buddhism insists there never was any personal existence to extinguish, but rather the extinguishing of the illusion of personal existence. (Walpola Rahula, "What the Buddha Taught: Revised and Expanded Edition with Texts from Suttas and Dhammapada" (Grove Press, 2007) Kindle Edition, Chapter 4) It is an end to desire, longing, craving, or the idea of oneself as a distinct and separate thing. (Keith Yandell and Harold Netland, "Buddhism: A Christian Exploration and Appraisal" (IVP Academic, 2009) 23-24) It is not a place that one enters or a state one acquires. It is simply the realization of what is already the ultimate reality. Rebirth is then at an end, suffering ceases, desires are done away with, and all simply "is."

The Christian eternity could not be more opposite. Personal existence continues for all, some to everlasting life and others to everlasting judgment, (John 5:28-29). Those who are saved from their sins in Jesus Christ have eternal bodily life without pain or suffering in the very presence of God, (Revelation 21:3-4). Those who remain in the guilt of their sins are punished for their evil forever in hell, "And the smoke of their torment goes up forever and ever; they have no rest day and night," (Revelation 14:11).

Desire, suffering, and eternity: A contrast between Eastern philosophy and the gospel
by Luke Wayne
February 27, 2017
9 min read
Acentral concept in Buddhism and many forms of Hinduism is the idea that our desires are the root of all our suffering and are what keep us bound in the cycle of death and rebirth. Humanity’s problem is volition, want, desire, will, yearning, craving, or thirst. Everything else comes back to this central human flaw: men desire things. They want to exist, and they want certain objects and experiences in their existence. Nothing can ever truly satisfy even the noblest of these desires, and so suffering extends on from one life to another.

In the Bhagavad Gita, the most popular sacred text in Hinduism, the god Krishna is said to have explained:

“From attachment comes desires, and from desires anger comes. Delusion rises out of anger, loss of mindfulness from delusion; with mindfulness gone, higher mind perishes, and the man is lost.” (Bhagavad Gita, 2:62-63). (Gavin Flood and Charles Martin, The Bhagavad Gita: A New Translation (W.W. Norton and Company, 2012) 22)

He goes on to explain:

“The man who has abandoned all desire moves, free from longing, indifferent to ‘me’ and ‘mine,’ and without ego, attains peace. This is the divine condition; who, undeluded, comes to this, abiding there till his end-time comes, Arjuna, knows absolute peace,”(Bhagavad Gita, 2:71-72). (Gavin Flood and Charles Martin, The Bhagavad Gita: A New Translation (W.W. Norton and Company, 2012) 24)

He warns even against seemingly noble, religious longings and heavenly hopes. The one who sets his eyes on heaven is still acting on desire, which will only lead him to rebirth in this suffering world. (Bhagavad Gita, 2:43) Release is found only in turning from all desires. (Bhagavad Gita, 2:55) It is not enough to reject the wrong and desire only to do the right, for:

“One disciplined by higher mind here casts off good and bad actions,” (Bhagavad Gita, 2:50). (Gavin Flood and Charles Martin, The Bhagavad Gita: A New Translation (W.W. Norton and Company, 2012) 20)

Likewise, the ancient Buddhist text known as the “Sumyutta-Nikaya” describes Buddha explaining:

“Now this, O monks, is the noble truth of the cause of pain: craving, which leads to rebirth, combined with pleasure and lust, finding pleasure here and there, the craving for passion, the craving for existence, the craving for non-existence.” (Keith Yandell and Harold Netland, “Buddhism: A Christian Exploration and Appraisal” (IVP Academic, 2009) 15-16)

In the same document, Buddha further explains “nirvana,” (or the final freedom from suffering) as, “extinction of thirst, detachment, cessation.” (Walpola Rahula, What the Buddha Taught: Revised and Expanded Edition with Texts from Suttas and Dhammapada (Grove Press, 2007) Kindle Edition, Chapter 4, Location 876) He further elaborates:

“O Bhikkhus, what is the Absolute? It is, O Bhikkhus, the extinction of desire, the extinction of hatred, the extinction of illusion. This, O Bhikkhus, is called the Absolute.” (Walpola Rahula, What the Buddha Taught: Revised and Expanded Edition with Texts from Suttas and Dhammapada (Grove Press, 2007) Kindle Edition, Chapter 4, Location 877-880)

So, for the Buddhist or Hindu, a man needs to eliminate all desire and every yearning if he is to be free from suffering and transcend into eternity.

A Biblical Response: The Proper Place for Desires
The Bible also has strong words about the central role our desires play in human sin and suffering. James, for example, wrote:

“But each one is tempted when he is carried away and enticed by his own lust. Then when lust has conceived, it gives birth to sin; and when sin is accomplished, it brings forth death,” (James 1:14-15).

He explains later in his letter:

“What is the source of quarrels and conflicts among you? Is not the source of your pleasures that wage war in your members? You lust and do not have; so you commit murder. You are envious and cannot obtain; so you fight and quarrel,” (James 4:1-2).

At first glance, these things don’t sound so different from Krishna or Buddha. However, James follows up each of these statements, respectively, by saying:

“Every good thing given and every perfect gift is from above, coming down from the Father of lights, with whom there is no variation or shifting shadow,” (James 1:17).

“You do not have because you do not ask. You ask and do not receive, because you ask with wrong motives, so that you may spend it on your pleasures,” (James 4:2-3).

Selfish desires and carnal lusts are factories for iniquity. They will keep producing sin after sin on into eternity. There are, however, things that we should want, and there is also a manner in which we should want them. The Bible doesn’t tell us to stop wanting anything. Rather, it instructs us to abandon selfish ambition and conform our desires to the will of God, the only one who can truly and lastingly fulfill them anyway. We are to desire the right things and for the right reasons. Our Lord pronounced:

“Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they shall be satisfied,” (Matthew 5:6).

This small beatitude conflicts with Buddhist and Hindu teachings in at least two fundamental ways. The first is to suggest that there is something for which we ought to yearn, or to “hunger and thirst.” The second is that such a longing could ever be satisfied. Indeed, the second of the “four noble truths” that form the core of Buddhist teaching is that Tanha (desire, or literally “thirst”) is the cause of all human suffering because no desire can ever be fulfilled. No thirst can ever be satisfied. God, however, promises that He will bless those who hunger and thirst for righteousness. Their blessing is that they will be satisfied! Scripture elsewhere says:

“Therefore, putting aside all malice and all deceit and hypocrisy and envy and all slander, like newborn babies, long for the pure milk of the word, so that by it you may grow in respect to salvation, if you have tasted the kindness of the Lord,” (1 Peter 2:1-2).

Again, we are to lay aside sinful motivations like envy, but we are not to lay aside desire altogether. The word of God, the kindness of the Lord, the wellspring of our salvation is something for which we are to yearn the way a newborn baby yearns for milk! Again, it is good to thirst, so long as we are thirsting after that which can satisfy. Notice that, in both of these passages, we are not called to merit our own righteousness and thus satisfy ourselves. It is God who will grant us righteousness. He will satisfy our desire. We have only to repent and believe. Indeed our greatest desire, the object of our faith, is Jesus Himself. We not only trust in His finished work on Calvary to atone for all of our sins, but we also long for His return which will bring with it the full satisfaction of all other righteous desires:

“For the grace of God has appeared, bringing salvation to all men, instructing us to deny ungodliness and worldly desires and to live sensibly, righteously and godly in the present age, looking for the blessed hope and the appearing of the glory of our great God and Savior, Christ Jesus, who gave Himself for us to redeem us from every lawless deed, and to purify for Himself a people for His own possession, zealous for good deeds,” (Titus 2:11-14).

Again, we are to lay aside worldly desires, but not all desires. There is something we are to be looking for, longing after, and eagerly anticipating. The coming of Jesus Christ to deliver us once and for all from sin and death. We trust in the grace of God, which alone brings salvation. We believe in God’s gracious gift of salvation in Jesus Christ. We submit to the instruction in this grace to repent, to turn from sin and instead to seek righteousness, to “deny ungodliness and worldly desires and to live sensibly, righteously and godly in the present age.” In all of this, we long for Christ to come and set the world right.

Notice that all of this focuses on God in Christ. His Grace. His work of Salvation. His coming. His setting things right in the world and purifying us as a people for His possession. There is no room in this for pride, greed, selfishness, and petty, personal ambition. If you still have your eyes set on yourself, you have missed the point entirely. We are to turn away from all selfish desires, but we’re still to have desires.

“The desire of the righteous is only good, But the expectation of the wicked is wrath,” (Proverbs 13:2).

“What the wicked fears will come upon him, But the desire of the righteous will be granted,” (Proverbs 10:24).

To purge ourselves of all desire, even the desire to do good, would itself be evil. If we see a hungry child and have no desire to feed her, we are wicked. If we see a man in rags, shivering in the cold of winter, and we have no desire to provide him warmth and proper clothes, it is a testimony of our depravity, not our enlightenment. So it is wrong to rid ourselves of all desires. Rather, we are to lay aside evil and selfish lusts and instead cultivate righteous and good desires. We cannot do this on our own. Indeed, to set out to remake ourselves on our own merits for our own reasons would only cultivate arrogance and fuel our selfish desires. No, we must confess our sinfulness, our guilt, our utter inadequacy, and we must turn to God, the giver of all that is good and the satisfier of every righteous desire. Trusting fully that God, in Jesus Christ, has paid the price for our sins and promised us eternal life in His presence, purified of all our iniquities, we then live in light of that truth and set aside fleeting, worldly things in eager anticipation of that blessed hope. All of this is for the glory of the Lord Jesus Christ, not for our own personal greatness. Yet in this, our own faith and righteous desires are fulfilled.

“To this end also we pray for you always, that our God will count you worthy of your calling, and fulfill every desire for goodness and the work of faith with power, so that the name of our Lord Jesus will be glorified in you, and you in Him, according to the grace of our God and the Lord Jesus Christ,” (2 Thessalonians:1:11-12).

Is Karma an adequate foundation for morality?
by Luke Wayne
February 10, 2017
6 min read
Karma is a prominent teaching in many Eastern religions (such as Hinduism and Buddhism) that has become increasingly appealing to people in the West. The word “Karma” means “action” or “doing.” (Walpola Rahula, “What the Buddha Taught: Revised and Expanded Edition with Texts from Suttas and Dhammapada” (Grove Press, 2007) Kindle Edition, Chapter 2.) The religious doctrine of Karma teaches that any act of volition or any willful deed performed in this life produces effects that shape and determine our future lives. Karma is, thus, rooted deeply in the Eastern idea of a potentially endless cycle of rebirths or reincarnations.

Is Karma Morality?
Karma is not a moral law. It is a law of cause and effect by which some actions have relatively desirable results, and others have relatively undesirable ones, but it makes no judgment as to whether these deeds are “right” or “wrong.” Ultimately, any Karma keeps one ensnared in the cycle of rebirths and thus should be avoided. As Buddhist scholar Walpola Rahula explains:

“Volition may relatively be good or bad, just as a desire may relatively be good or bad. So karma may be good or bad relatively. Good karma (kusala) produces good effects, and bad karma (akusala) produces bad effects. ‘Thirst’, volition, and karma, whether good or bad, have one force as its effect: force to continue— to continue in a good or bad direction. Whether good or bad it is relative and is within the cycle of continuity (saṃsāra).” (ibid)

Thus, all Karma, whether “good” or “bad,” ultimately keeps one bound to the suffering cycle of death and rebirth. If Karma were real, one’s aim should not be to avoid only bad Karma and accumulate good Karma in hopes of a better life, but rather to avoid all Karma in hopes of liberation from this endless cycle of suffering. Therefore, Karma does not prescribe that people do good things and avoid bad things. Instead, it prescribes that we abandon the idea of a personal self that is distinct from the objects around us so that we can purge ourselves of any desire at all. If we act on desires, even desires to help people, we will be bound by our Karma. If we have an ambition, even an ambition to end injustice, we will be bound by our Karma. Volitional action must be avoided, even if the action is noble. As one Hindu source teaches:

“The truth is that all things are one, but those who see a difference go from death to death like water runs to waste among the hills. The soul goes into embodiment according to its actions and according to its knowledge,” (David Burnett, The Spirit of Hinduism (Monarch Books, 2006) 66, paraphrasing the Katha Upanishad)

The great Hindu sage, Samkara, likewise said:

‘Neither by the practice of Yoga or of Samkhya, nor by good works, nor by learning, does liberation come; but only through the realization that Atman[the inner divine essence] and Brahman[the universal divine essence] are one – in no other way.” (Samkara, Crest-Jewel of Discrimination (Mentor Book, 1947) 42, as cited in David Burnett, The Spirit of Hinduism (Monarch Books, 2006) 180)

Karma is not the idea that we should do certain things so the universe will reward us or avoid certain things so that the universe will not punish us. It is also not a force of justice, seeking to right wrongs or give people “what they deserve.” Rahula himself explains that Karma is not concerned with justice or morality:

“The idea of moral justice arises out of the conception of a supreme being, a God, who sits in judgment, who is law-giver and who decides what is right and wrong.” (Walpola Rahula, “What the Buddha Taught: Revised and Expanded Edition with Texts from Suttas and Dhammapada” (Grove Press, 2007) Kindle Edition, Chapter 3)

Karma, then, is not a source of moral justice or active virtue. It either encourages us to abandon all motivation and all desire to do positive good for others or at best it gives us a self-serving pragmatism by which we might act in certain ways to obtain the future life we desire. As Buddhist author Thich Nhat Hanh explains:

“Right and wrong are neither moral judgments nor arbitrary standards from outside. Through our own awareness, we discover what is beneficial (‘right’) and what is unbeneficial (‘wrong’).” (Thich Nhat Hanh, “The Heart of the Buddha’s Teaching” (Broadway Books, 1998) 11)

Applying the Doctrine of Karma
Consider what this means. If you seek enlightenment and an end to suffering, you must abandon all desire and all distinctions. You cannot give sacrificially of yourself with the goal of helping other people because that entails the desire and the ideas of separation and distinct selves. On the one hand, you will certainly not rape, murder, steal, or cheat your neighbor because those things flow out of personal desires for possessions, sexual gratification, power, or revenge. On the other hand, neither will you go about seeking to cure diseases, bring about reforms that will end societal injustices, or even buy a gallon of milk to help a poor lady who can’t afford to feed her infant. These actions are also volitional acts of the will. They flow out from desires and the idea of personal selves and distinctions in the universe. The quest for enlightenment might produce a quiet, harmless life, but not a virtuous one.

If, however, you reject enlightenment and instead decide to live in the world of Karma and engineer your future births, what then? What kind of life would you live? Well, that would depend on the kind of future life you want. Karma doesn’t tell you what kind of life you should desire. It just tells you that if you do certain things, then certain kinds of effects will follow. A violent man might come back as a lion, but then again, a violent man might want to be a lion. There is nothing immoral about being a lion. It’s all a matter of preference. It also might be that, though I know a certain action will come around to hurt me in a future life, I weigh the pros and cons and decide that it is worth it. This might be short-sighted, but who’s to say you can’t be short-sighted once in a while? Karma has no opinion on the matter.

The Only True Foundation
If we want a foundation for moral justice and virtues, Karma does not offer us the answer. Instead, as even the Buddhist scholar cited above concedes, it arises out of the nature and commands of God alone. The wise King Solomon wrote:

“The conclusion, when all has been heard, is: fear God and keep His commandments because this applies to every person. For God will bring every act to judgment, everything which is hidden, whether it is good or evil” (Ecclesiastes 12:13-14).

And of those commandments, our Lord Jesus said:

“And He said to him, ‘You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your mind.’ This is the great and foremost commandment. The second is like it, ‘You shall love your neighbor as yourself.’ On these two commandments depend the whole Law and the Prophets” (Matthew 22:37-40).

This is our only true foundation for morality.

Is there a karma wheel in the Bible?
by Matt Slick
April 18, 2019
4 min read
The idea of a Karma Wheel is not biblical.  Karma is associated with reincarnation and reincarnation is also not biblical.  Karma is supposed to be the summation of good and bad deeds in our lives that then determine wkarma wheel hat level of incarnation a person has in his next life.  Karma and reincarnation are Hindu ideas and are not biblical. Nevertheless, let’s take a look at what a Karma Wheel is supposed to be.

“The Wheel of Karma is the Alchemy Wheel of Creation that spirals around as if in the loops of a slinky toy allowing souls to move consciousness from one level of awareness to another. There are no soul contracts. Your soul’s programming, everything you do, is based on your encoded DNA, released as if a time capsule as one’s frequency changes.” (crystalinks.com/wheelofkarma.html)
“Our current life, for that matter all lives, is bounded by the wheel of Karma. Past life Karmas are the reason for the incarnation of the Soul in this world. The Soul incarnates at a prefixed time and place according to Karmas of the past life.” (speakingtree.in/blog/the-karmic-wheel)
From these quotes, we can see that a karma wheel is the cycle of incarnations of life that are based upon the deeds, both good and bad, performed by an individual.  But, nothing in Scripture speaks of reincarnation. If anything, the contrary is stated.

Hebrews 9:27, “And inasmuch as it is appointed for men to die once and after this comes judgment.”
2 Corinthians 5:10, “For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, so that each one may be recompensed for his deeds in the body, according to what he has done, whether good or bad.”
Jude 14-15, “…Behold, the Lord came with many thousands of His holy ones, 15 to execute judgment upon all, and to convict all the ungodly of all their ungodly deeds which they have done in an ungodly way, and of all the harsh things which ungodly sinners have spoken against Him.”
The Bible says
The Bible says that it is appointed to men to die once then judgment (Hebrews 9:27). This judgment is carried out by Jesus (2 Cor. 5:10; Jude 14-15) with the result being condemnation or salvation. This then means there can be no reincarnation. Furthermore, if there is no reincarnation, then karma is meaningless. If karma is meaningless, there is no “Wheel of Karma.”

Problems with karma and reincarnation
There is a problem with the concept of karma and reincarnation. Basically, in reincarnation teaching, a person comes into existence from the spiritual realm and has the first incarnation. His goal is to learn and to progress through various incarnations (samsara), with improving karma, so that eventually he or she achieves Nirvana and stops progressing through the cycle of births.  He then ceases to exist as an individual and enters a state of interconnected transcendence with all things.

But, this means that at the first incarnation, the person had perfect karma because there had been no previous earthly incarnation and therefore he had done nothing wrong. His Karma is without blemish. It is perfect. Yet, in karma/reincarnation theology, such a person fails to achieve nirvana and continues through the cycle of birth and rebirth (samsara). But, why does he fail to reach nirvana after his first incarnation since he had perfect karma? The general response is that a person has things to learn that can only be acquired through various reincarnations. But, again, if a person could not learn what was necessary with perfect karma, how is he or she expected to learn what is necessary with imperfect karma? Furthermore, when the person learns whatever it is he is supposed to learn, he then reaches a state of nirvana, the incarnation stops, he loses his self-identity, and then he transcends all things. But, if the person loses all sense of self-identity, then what good is it to learn the lessons that the repeated cycle of reincarnation requires?

It makes no sense.