- If you have your bibles with you
tonight, please open them to First
Corinthians, chapter 15. I say your
bibles, if you have your bibles, if you
have your phone, if you have your iPad,
whatever else you use to carry around your
copy of God's word. First Corinthians,
chapter 15. My assignment tonight is to
address verses 35 through 58. First
Corinthians, chapter 15, verses 35 through
58. Before I do that, please allow me an
opportunity to express my gratitude to my
fellow council members, the Gospel
Coalition, to my dear friends, brothers
and mentors who have given me this
assignment. I'm humbled by this privilege,
and I'm grateful for it. I'm grateful for
the way the Word of God has been preached
over these last couple of days. And, every
time I came in here, to hear the Word of
God preached, I found myself both grateful
for the opportunity to hear it, and also,
just praying that they leave me something.
And they left me, they left me a little
bit. I'm grateful to you for your
kindness, and the way that you always
receive those of us who serve on this
council and pray for us. Please continue
to do that, and unfortunately, this will
be my farewell because you have to be a
North American to be a part of the
council. And you have to be a North
American resident, and I'll be slightly
outside of that as of August. I'm living
in South Central Africa. So rules are
rules, and I have been kicked out.
But Don Carson did it, so it felt great
when it happened.
First Corinthians, chapter 15. Let's begin
at verse 35, and I'll just read the text.
This is one of those passages that just
needs to be read in it's entirety. And
it's one of those passages, really, that
there's a temptation when you read this
text to just, when you finish, close your
bible, and be done. But someone will ask,
"How are the dead raised? With what kind
of body do they come?" You foolish person.
What you sow, does not come to life unless
it dies. And what you sow, is not the body
that is to be but a bare kernel, perhaps
of wheat, or of some other grain. But God
gives it a body, as he has chosen. And so
each kind of seed it's own body. Or to
each kind of seed it's own body. For not
all flesh is the same, but there is one
kind for humans, another for animals,
another for birds, and another for fish.
There are heavenly bodies and earthly
bodies, but the glory of the heavenly is
of one kind, and the glory of the
earthly of another.
There is one glory of the sun, and another
glory of the moon, and another glory of
the stars. For star differs from stars in
glory. So it is with the resurrection of
the dead. What is sown is perishable. What
is raised, imperishable. It is sown in
dishonor. It is raised in glory.
It is sown in wickedness. It is raised in
power. It is sown a natural body. It is
raised a spiritual body. If there is a
natural body, there is also a spiritual
body. Thus, it is written, the first man,
Adam became a living being. The last Adam
became a life-giving spirit. But, it is
not the spiritual that is first, but the
natural, and then the spiritual. The first
man was from the earth. A man of dust. The
second man is from heaven. As was the man
of dust, so also are those who are of the
dust. And as is the man of heaven, so also
are those who are of heaven. Just as we
have borne the image of the man of dust,
we shall also bear the image of the man of
heaven. I tell you this, brothers. Flesh
and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of
God. Nor does the perishable inherit the
imperishable. Behold, I tell you a
mystery. We shall not all sleep, but we
shall all be changed in a moment, in a
twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet.
For the trumpeter will sound, and the dead
will be raised imperishable. And we shall
be changed. For this perishable body must
put on the imperishable, and this mortal
body must put on immortality.
When the perishable puts on the
imperishable, and the mortal puts on
immortality, then shall come to pass the
saying that is written. Death is swallowed
up in victory. O death, where is your
victory? O death, where is your sting?
The sting of death is sin, and the power
of sin is the law. But thanks be to God,
who gives us the victory through our Lord,
Jesus Christ. Therefore, my beloved
brothers, be steadfast, immovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord. Knowing
that in the Lord, your labor is not in
vain. Amen. Hallelujah. Praise the Lord.
There is so much here, so let's delve into
it. As I read this text, one of the things
that stood out to me was the fact that,
Paul is actually being pastoral here. He's
doing Apologetics, absolutely, in this
chapter. But at this point, there is
pastoral ministry happening. There is a
sense in which he is dealing with the
doctrine of the resurrection from a
practical, pastoral perspective. Paul has
provided a convincing apologetic for the
doctrine of the resurrection. He offered
three lines of argumentation, in order to
prove his point. First, there was the
argument from authority, what the
scriptures say in verses one through four.
Second, there was the argument from
evidence. The account of eyewitnesses,
including himself, five through 11.
Finally, he offers an argument from logic.
If there is no such thing as the
resurrection, then there are seven things
that must follow as inexorably as night
follows day. And after he has done this,
he goes back to the fact that he's already
proven that Christ has been raised. So
that his argument is confirmed.
However, having won the day and proved his
point, Paul is not content to merely stand
triumphantly over the bodies of his
defeated foes. This, for him, was about
more than winning an argument.
He moves beyond apologetics and returns to
poiminics. He goes from proving his point
to pressing his point. From orthodoxy to
orthopraxy. He goes from the fact that the
resurrection is true, to the reason why it
matters. And it matters.
As the quintessential pastor apologist,
Paul takes the opportunity to shepherd the
sheep toward their ultimate hope. And he
does so by employing his oft used practice
of dealing with a question as though being
asked, as he writes. He does this in a
number of places. He does this in a large
section, or in several large sections of
the book of Romans. And here, he begins
with, "But someone will ask." There is
this practical point here, where he has
proved that the resurrection is true. And
now, he's proving that the resurrection is
essential. And he doesn't just do it in an
ethereal way. But he does it in a way
where he deals with a question that he has
either been asked before, or he knows he's
going to be asked, based on his
understanding of the human condition, and
the way people relate to this kind of
information. But, is this question valid?
And what does
this question reveal when he says, "But
someone will ask, 'how are the dead
raised? With what kind of body do they
come?'." We know what happens to things
when they die. We know what happens to
people when they die.
We understand death. We don't know what
the resurrection looks like, because we've
never seen a resurrection ourselves. All
we have is the record and testimony of the
witnesses of the resurrection of Jesus
Christ, all those years ago. That's what
prompts Calvin to write, "There is nothing
that is more at variance with human reason
then this article of faith. For who but
God alone could persuade us that bodies,
which are now liable to corruption, will,
after having rotted away, or after they
have been consumed by a fire, or torn in
pieces by wild beasts, will not merely be
restored entire, but in a greatly better
condition. Do not all our apprehensions of
things straightway reject this as a thing
fabulous? Nay, most absurd."
I resonate with that.
The first time I saw a dead body, I was 17
years old, and an unbeliever. I had never
heard the gospel. I still wouldn't hear
the gospel for another year or so after
that. I was raised by a single teenaged
Buddhist mother in drug infested, gang
infested south central Los Angeles,
California. And when I got old enough to
find a little trouble, or for a little
trouble to find me, my mother shipped me
out. And we moved from south central LA,
all the way across the country. Three days
on a Greyhound bus, to Buford, South
Carolina, where we then lived with her
oldest brother, who was a retired drill
instructor in the Marine Corp.
- Ooh Rah.
- And I got out of trouble.
Quick, fast and in a hurry. However,
several years later, having moved to the
great state of Texas, I got a phone call.
And my cousin, Jamal, was dead. All of a
sudden, I was reminded of the things that
my mother had rescued me from by taking me
away. I was reminded, as I contemplated my
cousin who was six months younger than I.
Who had become a drug dealer, and who,
depending on which stories are accurate,
somehow found himself in a bad situation,
and at 16 years old was shot in the back
of the head. And he lay dead. We traveled
back to Los Angeles, and I stood there
over his body, and I had no hope.
I stood there over his body, and all I
could think was that, this is over.
This is it, and not only is this over, and
not only is this it, but what do I have to
look forward to, other than this?
What more is there than this?
And so, I resonate with this idea,
that this is not something that
is easy for us to grasp. And yet, Paul
rebukes Corinthian unbelief. Yes, it's
something difficult to grasp. However,
this is something that God has said in his
Word. It's one thing for an unbeliever to
not have categories to deal with death.
It's another thing, for individuals who
are associated with the Church of the
Living God, who have heard about the
death, burial and resurrection of Jesus
Christ to say,
"I'm not sure that can happen."
And so he says, "You foolish people."
Paul does not say, "Hey, I understand how
difficult this is for you to grasp. I get
that." He says, "You foolish person."
This is not a mere insult. The language
here is designed to press home a point.
Paul was not just insulting the
Corinthians who disagreed with this
because he felt like calling them a name.
The point that he was making was, you have
the evidence of the Word of God. You have
the evidence of apostolic teaching. But
you also have the evidence of general
revelation. I just can't comprehend how
something could die, and be buried, and
then come back again. You foolish person.
What did you eat today? It probably died,
and was buried in one form, and then came
back in another form. God has shown you,
not only through his Word, but through the
things that you see, even in nature. And
yet, you've determined not to believe.
Which means that you have to accept an
alternative answer.
And what is your alternative answer? Well,
your alternative answer could be some sort
of Platonic Dualism.
Ghostism, Cerinthian Gnosticism. Some idea
that basically matter is bad, and because
matter is bad, this whole resurrection
thing with Jesus, wasn't really a
resurrection at all. Either, either,
either, He wasn't really human, because
God would not inhabit sinful human flesh.
And He only appeared to be human, didn't
leave footprints, for example. Or He was
human, but His deity merely came upon him
at His baptism, and then left him there at
the cross. But, the idea that He was fully
human, is completely unacceptable to this
kind of dualistic thinking. And so, if
you're not going to believe the
resurrection, you're probably going to
believe something like this. And Paul
refutes that. If you're not going to
believe the resurrection, what do you
have? Reincarnation? That somehow, this is
just your earth suit, and you'll leave
this earth suit, and you'll go to another
earth suit. And it may be an animal, and
it may be a bird. It may be a pig. It may
be a... We have to treat animals well.
Why? Because that may be a dearly departed
relative. That won't do.
Perhaps some kind of nihilism. The whole
Lion King Circle of Life type thing. That
it really doesn't matter at all. We die,
then we go back to the dust, and we're
just consumed into this endless cycle or
circle that happens. There's a group
called the Urban Death Project, and
recently, they floated the idea of using
dead human beings as fertilizer. We use
other dead things. Why not use people?
You see, the first thing that resurrection
life does for us, is that it addresses our
anthropology, our understanding of the
very nature of man. This doctrine affirms
the dignity of humanity. The fact that
Christ took on flesh, and that he was,
then, dead and buried, and was raised
again. He did not merely discard his
flesh, and go back to his heavenly home.
He took this flesh with him, in its
resurrected form. And that says something
about the inherent dignity of humanity, in
its entirety. The fact that human beings,
as whole beings, have dignity inherent to
them. It says something about the way we
think of ourselves, and about the way that
we think of other people. It says
something about the sanctity of human life
at every point. God could have had His Son
come in another way, but He did not. God
could have skipped over those
insignificant aspects of human existence,
but He did not. God did not have His Son
skip over those aspects of human
existence, because they are significant.
And, so Christ comes into the womb of a
woman, and experiences the entirety of
human development. Thereby sanctifying and
saying to us, "From the moment of
conception, that is human life. That is
worth being honored."
The resurrection teaches us this. Because
He takes that flesh back up. There's this
statement. Look at what He says. He goes
back to creation and, interestingly
enough, what He does, beginning in verse
39, is He takes days 4, 5 and 6 of
creation, and He does them in reverse.
Watch Him in verse 9. For not all flesh is
the same, but there is one kind for
humans, another for animals, another for
birds, another for fish. There are
heavenly bodies and earthly bodies. But
the glory of the heavenly is one kind, and
the glory of the earthly is another. There
is one glory of the sun, another glory of
the moon. And one glory of the stars, for
stars differ from stars in glory. So, the
idea here is that there is a glory of the
human body that is not the same as the
glory of other things. Not the same as the
glory of other bodies. That's why even a
nihilist will not pass by a dead human
being, and act as though there is nothing
wrong. I don't care what you say you
believe. If you see another fallen human
being, you don't simply step over, and
walk by. There is something in us that
understands this inherent dignity of
humanity. This is why you can pass by a
car accident, and if it looks as though
someone has died, you can be laughing and
jovial and playing, but the moment you
realize that a human being, even though,
you did not know him or her, or whether it
was a him or her, someone is dead, and
you're not the same.
Because there is a different glory
associated with us, and the resurrection
of Jesus Christ affirms this.
It transforms our anthropology. Not only
does it transform our anthropology, but it
also transforms our Soteriology. That
there is a bridge statement here,
beginning in verse 42. So is it with the
resurrection of the dead. What is sown is
perishable. What is raised imperishable.
It is sown in dishonor, raised in glory.
It is sown in weakness. It is raised in
power. It is sown a natural body. It is
raised a spiritual body. If there is a
natural body, there is also a spiritual
body. So, this glory, there is
also...there is one sense in which the
glory of the human body is different than
the glory of other flesh. But, there is
also the sense in which the glory of the
resurrected body is different than the
glory of our bodies, as they are now.
And this leads into the second movement,
where this changes our Soteriology. And
look at what he does in this section. In
this section, we are introduced to the
idea of the first Adam and the last Adam.
Thus it is written, the first Adam became
a living being. The last Adam became a
life giving spirit. But it is not the
spiritual that is first, but the natural,
and then the spiritual. The first man was
from the earth, a man of the dust. The
second man is from heaven. As was the man
of the dust, so also are those who are of
the dust. And as is the man of heaven, so
also are those who are of heaven. Just as
we have born the image of the man of the
dust, we shall also bear the image of the
man of heaven. He's been resurrected, and
we're going to be resurrected. Why?
Because we are united with Him. There is
the idea here and the hinting of federal
headship. The concept was introduced
earlier, this morning, but let me delve
into it a little bit more. Because Paul is
dealing with the idea here that the
resurrection is real for us. Because our
union with Christ is real for us.
We have actual union with Jesus Christ. In
fact, death for us, is the direct result
of our union under the federal headship of
Adam. So that in Adam, all of us die. Our
resurrection, then is connected to the
change of our federal headship. But why
are we all guilty in Adam? The same reason
that we are all forgiven in Christ.
Earlier on, verses 21 and 22 he says, "For
as by a man came death. By a man has come
also, resurrection of the dead. For as in
Adam all died, so also in Christ, all
shall be made alive." Folks, this is why
the virgin birth matters. Jesus is not
under the federal headship of Adam. Excuse
me, and if somebody could give me a towel
or something, because they're wearing me
out with these lights.
Got me preaching out of my
clothes, y'all.
So this is why the virgin birth matters.
So those who say, "You know the virgin
birth? We can take it. We can leave it. It
doesn't matter. All we need is Christ as
our example." No. If Christ is merely our
example, and there was no virgin birth,
then He stands condemned, because Adam is
his federal head. As are all of those who
come by natural generation. However,
because... Thank you. Because of the
virgin birth, He is not under that federal
headship. This is why His impeccability
matters. This is why it matters that Jesus
did not sin. A recent worldview survey
found that some 45% of professing
Christian teenagers believe that Jesus
sinned during his earthly ministry.
I know two things. Number one, they don't
understand the gospel, and number two,
they're not being catechized. The most
basic catechisms deal with this. What kind
of life did Christ live on earth? A life
of perfect obedience to the Law of God.
Little bitty kids are asked
these questions.
But you see, we've come to believe that
theology doesn't matter. Paul doesn't
believe that. He believes that the
doctrine of the resurrection matters on a
very practical level. Because, if you
don't get this doctrine of the
resurrection right, then you don't
understand that you are under Christ's
federal headship. And you don't understand
the significance of His active and His
passive obedience. That in His active
obedience, he kept the entirety of the law
and was actually righteous. Thereby, He's
able to impute actual righteousness to
you. And, in His passive obedience, He
accepts in Himself the death that you owed
to God, but could not pay. Therefore, we
can impute to Him our sinfulness. And
because of this double imputation, we
stand before God, under the federal
headship of Jesus Christ. Not only
forgiven, but righteous. And we can
actually anticipate the resurrection
of our bodies.
That doctrine matters. If Christ is not
actually righteous, then He's no better
than Buddha. He's not better than Ghandhi.
He's no better than Confucious. He's just
an example, and you can take Him or leave
Him. But, if He was born of a virgin,
lived a sinless life, died a vicarious,
substitutionary death, rose in a
victorious, confirming resurrection, has
ascended to the right hand of God. Is
there making intercession for us, and is,
one day, going to return to judge the
living and the dead. And to gather His
people unto Himself. And to take them
where He is. Then, this doctrine matters.
Let me hasten here.
And look at the third movement.
Because in the third movement,
we see this picture of how resurrection
life changes our Missiology, our
anthropology, our Soteriology, and then,
our Missiology. In this last section, he
starts by using a familiar passage, and
was already dealt with earlier. This is a
parallel passage to a passage that we
dealt with earlier. But, let's move down
here several verses, and look at what we
find here, beginning in verse 54. When the
perishable puts on the imperishable, and
the mortal puts on immortality. Then shall
come to pass the saying that is written,
death is swallowed up in victory. O death,
where is your victory? O death, where is
your sting? So, the only way out... Again,
the last time I checked, the death rate
was one per person.
I didn't look today, but I'm pretty sure
it hasn't changed. We all go that way. It
is appointed unto man to die once, and
then the judgement. And so, every man,
everywhere is asking the same question, or
will eventually ask the same question. How
do I avoid being defeated by that last
enemy? Because you can't whip him. You
can't buy him off. You can't appease him.
You can't outrun him. You can't exercise
enough. You can't eat well enough. There
is nothing you can do to avoid being
overtaken by this enemy.
But what the resurrection says, is that
you can overcome this enemy. Death is
swallowed up in victory. O death, where is
your victory? O death where is your sting?
You see, when you stand over a believer,
it's not the same as standing over an
unbeliever. Because, when you stand over a
believer, you know that. Because of his
union with Christ, his federal head, that
he will raise, just like Christ raised,
from the dead. There is a resurrection
coming. And so this sting and this victory
is gone. But look, there's more. The sting
of death is sin. The power of sin is the
law. Well, sin and the law have been dealt
with by the active obedience of Christ.
That's why the sting has been taken away.
Therefore, my beloved brethren, be
steadfast, immovable, always abounding in
the work of the Lord, knowing that your
labor is not in vain. The question is,
what is this labor? Now, how do we read
this? Is this labor referring to anything
that we do? Or is it referring to
something more specific? And, usually we
read this, and we read it as though it's
anything that we do. I believe there is
something more specific being referred to
here. Go back to verses 31 to 34. And
here, in his argument from logic, he
presents something very similar. He says,
"I protest brothers." By my... Actually
go... Sorry about that. Fourteen to 19.
Fourteen to 19. And if Christ has not been
raised, then our preaching is vain. Your
faith is vain. We are even found to be
misrepresenting God because we testified
about God. That He raised Christ, who He
did not raise, if it is true that the dead
are not raised. For if the dead are not
raised, not even Christ has been raised.
And if Christ has not been raised, your
faith is futile, and you are still in your
sins. Then, those also, who have fallen
asleep in Christ have perished. If in
Christ we have hope, in this life only, we
are of all people, most to be pitied. So,
he talks about your labor not being in
vain. He's referring to this idea before.
But, to what does he refer? He refers to
our gospel ministry. To our proclamation
of the gospel, but also, to our holiness
and our life of faith.
Later on, in the paragraph just before
this paragraph, the first paragraph in
verse 35. Thirty-one to 34.
I protest brothers, by
my pride in you, which I have in Christ
Jesus our Lord. I die every day. What do I
gain, if, humanly speaking, I fought with
beasts at Ephesis? If the dead are not
raised, let us each eat and drink, for
tomorrow we die. Do not be deceived. Bad
company ruins good morals. Wake up from
your drunken stupor, as is right, and do
not go on sinning. For some have no
knowledge of God.
I say this to your shame.
Again, what are we talking about? The
proclamation of the gospel and our life of
faith and righteousness. This is the labor
that's not in vain. The labor that's not
in vain is gospel labor. This labor of
righteousness because of the gospel, and
it's impact on us. And this labor in the
gospel as we proclaim it, so that Christ
might have the fullness of the reward for
which He died. That's the labor that's not
in vain. Is it because we're guaranteed
success? No. It's because we're guaranteed
that we're going to transform our culture.
If we do this, your labor won't be in
vain. You'll transform your culture,
you'll transform your community.
No, you may not.
Yet, you can labor in the gospel,
persevere in righteousness, pursue
holiness to the glory of God. Not achieve
any of the outward things, that you so
desperately achieve, and still say that
your labor has not been in vain.
Why? Four things. Because our labor means
that the true effectual gospel goes forth,
and that's never in vain. The proclamation
of the truth of the gospel is never in
vain. The proclamation of the truth of the
gospel will always accomplish that which
God intended for it to accomplish. And
that is never in vain, and so we pound
away, and we pound away, and we pound
away. Brothers, do not give up on
preaching the gospel.
It has happened from time to time and from
place to place, where preaching gospel
just didn't seem to get it done. And so,
we put our faith, and our hope, and our
trust in various programs and means of
manipulation. Building a better mousetrap.
Trying to find out what we needed to do in
order to bring them in, because therein
lies our success. No. Our success is in
our faithfulness in the proclamation of
the gospel. Do we want people to be saved?
Absolutely, we do. We want people to be
saved by the thousands, by the millions.
But, not so that we can say, "We were good
at what we did, " but so that we can say,
"I rejoice. I rejoice in Christ having the
fullness of the reward for which He died.
" Secondly, our labor conforms us to the
image of Christ in true righteousness when
it is gospel labor.
There are two chapters that are put back
to back. They're in the Book of Romans, in
Romans, Chapter five.
Paul talks about this idea of federal
headship with the first Adam and the last
Adam again. But then, he comes to chapter
six. And in chapter six, he asks another
very important question. Turn with me to
the left, if you will, and look at Romans,
the end of Romans, chapter five, and the
beginning of Romans, chapter six. That
last paragraph in Romans, chapter five
beginning at 18. Therefore, as one
trespass led to condemnation for all men,
so one act of righteousness leads to
justification and life for all men. For as
by one man's disobedience, the many were
made sinners, so by one man's obedience,
the many were made righteous. Now, the law
came into increase the trespass, but where
sin increased, grace abounds all the more.
So that, as sin reigned in death, grace
also might reign through righteousness,
leading to eternal life through Jesus
Christ, our Lord. Chapter six. What shall
we say then? Are we to continue in sin,
that grace may abound? By no means. How
can we who died to sin, still live in it?
Do you not know that all who have been
baptized into Christ Jesus, were baptized
unto His death? We were buried, therefore,
with Him in baptism unto death, in order
that, just as Christ was raised from the
dead, there's the resurrection by the
glory of the Father. We too, might walk in
newness of life.
So the resurrection is not just so that we
can get up on that great getting up
morning. The resurrection is also a
picture of us walking in the newness of
life that we have right now. Why? Because
that resurrection life is mine right now.
Martha learned this. Oh Jesus, Oh, if you
had just been here. Jesus, I know if you'd
have been here, my brother wouldn't have
died. If you had come before my brother
died, you could've done something. Because
I've seen you do things, and I know you
can do things. Then you could've done one
of the things that you do. Now, he's dead.
He's been dead for days. It's too late.
Jesus does not say to her, "I've got some
one day stuff for him." Oh, because one
day... He doesn't even say, "I'm getting
ready to call on my Father because my
Father, He can fix it." What does He say?
"I am the resurrection and the life.
He who believes in me, death's not enough
to hold him." And if Christ is the
resurrection and the life, then
resurrection life is not just something
that I'll look forward to, and it is that.
Amen. It is something that we look forward
to. But there is also a sense in which
that resurrection life is this current
reality, this already, not yet reality in
which we walk.
And why? For holiness. For
righteousness. For hope.
Thirdly, our labor prepares us for
His coming.
Prepares us for His coming. We
heard earlier today, when our brother
spoke about the first time that he
preached at a funeral. I remember the
first time that I preached at a funeral. I
remember the first time as a pastor, that
I preached at a funeral, and all of a
sudden, it just dawned on me. The pastor
is not just an administrator. The pastor
is not just a hand-holder. The pastor is
not just a preacher. The pastor is not
just a counselor. The pastor is not just
all of these things that we do. But I
stood there, and for the first time, I had
shepherded someone to the grave. And I
realized, that's what we do.
That's what we do.
We're so used to people just
getting up and leaving. They don't like
the color of the carpet. They don't like
the music. They don't like how you preach.
They don't like this. They don't like
that. And so, people just go, and they go,
and they go. But sometimes, people don't
go voluntarily.
Sometimes, God takes them.
And in those moments, we realize that
everything that we did in their life,
before that point, all of a sudden, right
now, has renewed meaning.
Why was it important that I preached to
that person? Because this day was coming.
Why was it important that I counseled that
person? Because this day was coming. Why
was it important that I evangelized that
person? Because this day was coming. Why
was it important that I held that persons
hand? Because this day was coming. Why is
it important that I do all the things that
I did with that person with all of the
rest of these people? Why? Because this
day is coming for all of us.
We are preparing people to meet God.
Entertainment doesn't do that. Coddling
doesn't do that. The gospel does that. And
when we grasp that, it changes the
magnitude and the gravitas of the ministry
that we have.
Finally, our labor gives us hope.
Our labor gives us hope.
You know there's a huge difference
between standing
over a 90-year-old man and preaching a
funeral, before a bunch of people who are
nodding and smiling. Because that
90-year-old man has lived this long and
full life, and knew the Lord and
loved the Lord.
And standing in front of a
casket this big.
How do you stand in front of a
casket this big and preach, looking into
the eyes of parents, who only had moments
with the child.
You better have the hope of the
resurrection. How do you stand up and
preach to a husband and five young
children, when a 42-year-old mother, who
went into the hospital because she was
feeling bad, a few days later was dead
from an infection? How do you do that?
You better not try to reason your way out
of that one. It is the hope of the gospel
and the hope of the resurrection, and the
reality that this is not our home, and
that we are being prepared for something
more. And that because of the resurrection
of Christ, that changes our anthropology,
we think about these people differently
and their wholeness differently. Because
it changes our Soteriology. We think about
what Christ has done for them and for us
differently. And because it changes our
Missiology, we think differently about the
way we utilize that moment, and what we
say, and why we say it. And now we know
our labor is not in vain. This is why the
doctrine of the resurrection is so
important. This is why it wasn't enough
for Paul to just win the argument. This is
why it wasn't enough to have people just
confess, "Okay, I believe that it's a
possibility." No. That's not enough. You
can't do that. This is your life. This is
who you are. This changes the way you
understand yourself as a human being, and
every other human being. It changes what
you mean by justification, and adoption,
and sanctification, and glorification. And
it changes what you mean by, why we do
what we do in gospel ministry, and in
righteous living.
Everything is changed when we understand
the resurrection of Jesus Christ.
And this is why we stand over
those elements, time
and time again, and remind our people,
time and time again. Whenever we eat this
bread, and drink this cup, we proclaim the
Lord's death, until he comes.
We ought always to be
resurrection centered.
Why? Because there is no
gospel without the resurrection.
Therefore, if we're not resurrection
centered, we're not gospel centered.
Let's pray.
Oh God, how we thank you. Oh how
we rejoice in this great truth. How we
rejoice in this great hope, as we get
older and our hair gets grayer, and as our
bodies break down and move more slowly.
And as diseases and infirmities come, we
are reminded again and again and again
that we won't be here forever.
And yet, as that reminder comes, there is
another great reminder, that you hold out
before us regularly. This reminder that
Christ has defeated that final foe. This
reminder that death doesn't have the last
word. This reminder that because of His
active and passive obedience, because of
his incarnation and wrapping himself in
flesh. Because of him taking our sin upon
himself, and dying, and paying the price
that we owed. And because His resurrection
has announced to all, that you have
accepted that payment. We have hope in the
face of our impending death. We have hope
as death is all around us. We have hope in
the midst of situations and circumstances
that seem hopelessness. We have hope,
because Christ was dead, but He is dead no
more. He is risen. We rejoice in this
truth. In Christ's name and for His sake.
Amen.